THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; SECURITY COUNCIL VOTES, 15-0, FOR TOUGH IRAQ RESOLUTION; BUSH CALLS IT A 'FINAL TEST'
By Julia Preston
Nov. 9, 2002


The Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution today that President Bush called a ''final test'' of Saddam Hussein's willingness to disarm, saying the Iraqi president's response must be ''prompt and unconditional, or he will face the severest consequences.''

''Any act of delay or defiance will be an additional breach of Iraq's international obligations, and a clear signal that the Iraqi regime has once again abandoned the path of voluntary compliance,'' Mr. Bush said in the White House Rose Garden.

The president praised the United Nations for meeting its leadership responsibilities, but he put the Council on notice that the United States would be watching the weapons inspections very closely, and expected a strong and swift response to any Iraqi violation.

''The outcome of the current crisis is already determined: the full disarmament of Iraq will occur,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The only question for the Iraqi regime to decide is how. The United States prefers that Iraq meet its obligations voluntarily, yet we are prepared for the alternative.''
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

The Iraqi government had no immediate reaction.

The approval of Resolution 1441 by a show of hands of the envoys of all 15 nations on the Council was an unexpected triumph for the Bush administration, eight weeks after the president's opening call to the United Nations, a declaration that made many countries fear a unilateral attack by Washington to topple Mr. Hussein. Changes in the language of the resolution paved the way. [Page A10.]

In intensive negotiations that culminated only minutes before the Council session began at 10 a.m. today, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, the only Arab nation on the Council, agreed to vote in favor.

The measure, supported by all the major powers as well as the Arab nations, sent an overwhelmingly clear message to Mr. Hussein.

''Noncompliance is no longer an option,'' the United States ambassador to the United Nations, John D. Negroponte, said after he cast his vote.

But while the resolution gave the Bush administration powerful new backing for its political confrontation with Mr. Hussein, most Council nations made it clear that they still did not support any rush to war.


''What is most important is that the resolution deflects the direct threat of war, and opens the road to further work in the interest of a diplomatic settlement,'' said Sergey Lavrov, the ambassador from Russia, the most reluctant of the five permanent, veto-bearing members of the Council.

It was not clear today what horse-trading Washington had done with France, Russia and Mexico, its reluctant allies, to bring them around. But diplomats from several Council nations said the Bush administration had bargained very effectively merely by stepping back from its threats to start immediate war in the Middle East with only a single ally, Britain.

There was no response today from Baghdad, which was officially notified of the resolution by the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, at 10:52 a.m. The Iraqi ambassador here, Mohammed Aldouri, said, ''Iraq will certainly study the resolution and decide whether we can accept it or not.''

Baghdad now has seven days to advise the Council whether it is willing to comply with the resolution.

The Council consensus on the resolution, which was sponsored by the United States and Britain, was achieved through a complex compromise struck in two months of arduous, often exasperating, discussions led by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell.

While the vote was unanimous, the Council delegates articulated differing interpretations of why they supported it, how it could be carried out and how it affected their national prerogatives.

Mr. Negroponte stressed that the resolution confirmed that Iraq has for years been in grave violation, or ''material breach,'' of its disarmament obligations, and that any new violation in the weapons inspections would be ''a serious matter.''
United States officials said that language gave Washington the legal basis to go to war unilaterally if the Council could not agree how to respond to new violations by Baghdad.

But the American ambassador also extended a specific assurance to France and other doubting nations that the resolution ''contains no hidden triggers'' and no automatic basis for the use of force. Mr. Negroponte said the United States was committed to coming back to the Council to discuss new Iraqi violations. Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British ambassador, echoed that assurance.

To underscore their understanding, China, France and Russia issued a separate statement today insisting that it was up to the United Nations weapons inspectors to report any violations to the Council, and up to the Council to ''take a position.''

France led the way in insisting that military action could be authorized only in a second stage, after the weapons inspectors did their work and if and when they detected Iraqi violations of the inspections regime.

In the resolution, the Security Council gives Iraq a ''final opportunity'' to comply with disarmament resolutions and establishes a rigorous regiment of inspections, giving United Nations inspectors immediate access to any site they want in Iraq. The text warns of ''serious consequences'' if Iraq commits any other violation -- meaning war. But such violations must be reported by the inspectors to the Council, which will meet to decide what to do.

The support of Russia and Syria had remained in doubt as recently as Thursday night.

President Assad shifted his position this morning, minutes before the vote, after receiving telephone calls from Mr. Annan and President Jacques Chirac of France. Mr. Chirac sought to persuade the Syrian leader that the resolution was the last chance to avoid war in the Middle East, French diplomats said.

''War is much less likely if you support the resolution than if you don't,'' Mr. Chirac told Mr. Assad, a diplomat said.
President Putin, who spoke with President Bush on Thursday morning, was persuaded late that night by the change of two words made in the draft late Thursday afternoon, senior administration officials said. They agreed to change the word ''or'' to ''and'' in one paragraph and to say the Council would act to ''secure'' peace rather than ''restore'' it in another.

To leaders who had been embroiled for weeks in arguing word by word about the draft, those seemingly minute revisions signaled that Washington and London were serious about returning to the Council before declaring war for another round of talks if the weapons inspectors reported breaches by Iraq.

The Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, called Secretary Powell only this morning to say that Mr. Putin had agreed to come on board, the administration officials said.

China, a permanent Council member that also waited until today to disclose its position, said it wanted to see a peaceful, ''comprehensive'' settlement in Iraq, including the lifting one day of the tough economic sanctions imposed at the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Mexico, a United States neighbor that holds one of 10 nonpermanent seats on the Council, supported the resolution after Mr. Chirac threw his support behind it on Thursday night.

The consensus vote was satisfying to Mr. Annan, who had insisted since the start of the negotiations that a divided decision would be a disaster for the United Nations and for the prospects of peace in the Middle East. ''I know that it has not been easy to reach agreement,'' he said. ''But the effort has been well worthwhile. Whenever the Council is united, it sends a very powerful signal.''

Mr. Annan urged Iraq ''for the sake of its own people, for the sake of world security and world order'' to seize the opportunity offered by the resolution. He cautioned that the next phase of the weapons inspections would be ''difficult and dangerous,'' calling it another ''time of trial'' for the United Nations.

The passage of the resolution was the signal to begin the weapons inspections. The chief United Nations inspector for chemical and biological weapons, Hans Blix, announced that he would travel to Baghdad to begin work on Nov. 19. He will be accompanied by Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief atomic weapons inspector.

Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei will arrive with only a small group of technicians to begin logistics planning for the weapons teams. The first group of about a dozen arms experts will arrive within 7 to 10 days.

Within 30 days, Iraq must present a complete declaration of all its weapons programs. Any omissions or false statements will constitute a new ''material breach'' that will begin the ''serious consequences'' threatened in the resolution.

Full scale inspections by both United Nations teams must begin within 45 days. Both weapons chiefs welcomed the enhanced authority the resolution gives them.

The vote was hailed by leaders in Europe. Mr. Chirac said it ''offers a chance for Iraq to disarm in peace.''

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain put it slightly differently. ''Saddam must now make his choice,'' he said. ''My message to him is this: Disarm or you face force.''
Correction: Nov. 10, 2002
One Word at a Time

Following are changes made to the wording of the resolution on Iraq before its approval on Friday by the United Nations Security Council. A chart printed yesterday reversed the old and new language.

Paragraph 4 Decides that false statements or omissions in the declarations submitted by Iraq pursuant to this resolution and failure by Iraq at any time to comply with, and cooperate fully in the implementation of, this resolution shall constitute a further material breach of Iraq's obligations and will be reported to the council for assessment in accordance with paragraph 11 and 12 below; Substituted for or

Paragraph 11 Directs the executive Chairman of Unmovic and the director general of the I.A.E.A. to report immediately to the Council any interference by Iraq with inspection activities, as well as any failure by Iraq to comply with its disarmament obligations, including its obligations regarding inspections under this resolution;

Paragraph 12 Decides to convene immediately upon receipt of a report in accordance with paragraphs 4 or 11 above, in order to consider the situation and the need for full compliance with all of the relevant council resolutions in order to secure international peace and security; Substituted for restore

The full text appeared on Nov. 8 and is online at nytimes.com/world.

Correction: Nov. 10, 2002
A chart yesterday with the article about wording changes that enabled the United Nations Security Council to adopt its resolution on Iraqi weapon inspections reversed the old and new language. (The article's description was correct.) A corrected chart appears today, on Page 16.

Correction: Nov. 11, 2002
A front-page article on Saturday about the Security Council's adoption of a resolution on arms inspections in Iraq misstated the date Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector for chemical and biological weapons, planned to travel there to begin work. It is Nov. 18, not Nov. 19.