Iraq's October Surprise; Fear of Hussein May Be Yielding to Doubt
By John F. Burns
Oct. 27, 2002


SADDAM HUSSEIN, a keen admirer of Stalin, who has lined his palace libraries with books about the Soviet dictator, is nothing if not a practitioner of the most ruthless school of power politics. But as American and British pressures mount, signs are accumulating that the Iraqi leader, like many a despot before him, may be ready to make further concessions in his domestic and international policies -- concessions that would have seemed unimaginable only a few weeks or months ago -- for the larger purpose of sustaining his power.

The catch for Mr. Hussein, as he will surely know from his readings, is that anything that looks like weakness or concession in a totalitarian system can very quickly invite challenges, as the leaders of the Soviet bloc found when they scrambled to reform the Communist system toward the end. In Iraq, those signs appear most poignantly in the astonishing moments of daring that some ordinary Iraqis are showing.

In a country where the merest hint of dissent had been a death sentence in years past, many foreign reporters have been approached in recent days by individuals offering forbidden thoughts. Taking advantage of moments in which the official ''minders'' assigned to journalists by the information ministry were distracted, or briefly absent, these Iraqis burst out with vehemence against the government, and often against Mr. Hussein personally.

One man, an out-of-work engineer, sat down beside a reporter relaxing at a Baghdad coffeehouse. After initial pleasantries in English, the man, who gave his age as 58, glanced about to make sure he was not being overheard, then leaned forward and said that almost no Iraqis would support Mr. Hussein if he allowed Iraq's dispute with the world over weapons of mass destruction to plunge the country into another war.

''We had eight years of war with Iran in the 1980's, and all we got was death,'' he said. ''Then we had the war over Kuwait, and more death. Nobody here wants another war. We want jobs. We want peace, not death.'' The man left without giving his name, and disappeared quickly into the crowd.

Another English-speaking man in his late 30's sidled up while a reporter was browsing at a bookshop not far from a large, high-walled complex of buildings that serves as a detention center for the secret police. The man looked across the street at banners draped from the complex's walls proclaiming ''Yes, Yes'' -- the government's slogan in a single-candidate presidential referendum last week that re-elected Mr. Hussein with what the official returns said was 100 percent of the 11.4 million votes.

''The only people who voted 'yes' with their hearts,'' the man said, ''were members of the Baath,'' the country's only legal party. Led by Mr. Hussein, it is modeled on the Soviet Communist Party. ''Everybody else,'' he added, ''voted out of fear.''

He continued at a breathless pace, suggesting that he had rehearsed for the scant moments he was likely to have: ''What the Iraqi people would like to hang on their walls would be banners saying, 'Yes, yes, Mr. Bush. Yes, yes, America.' There are 22 million Iraqis, and every one of them has 100 stories to tell of their suffering under Saddam.'' He gestured to the secret police building and added, ''If you go there, you are lucky if you live three days, maybe five.''

IT is, of course, hard to draw any sweeping conclusions about the future, or even the state of mind of Iraqis in general, from the comments of a few Iraqi citizens who are this courageous, or desperate. Except, perhaps, for this: that their actions are, in a way, part of a wider unhinging of events in Iraq in October 2002, and that these, taken together, may well have been a watershed for what the hagiography industry here calls ''the era of Saddam Hussein.''

First there was the referendum on Oct. 15 that was intended to show President Bush that the only candidate, Saddam Hussein, was not a murdering tyrant, as Mr. Bush has alleged, but a man so beloved by the Iraqi people that any thought of going to war on his own ground would be an act of self-delusion. After his perfect score with his people was announced -- a record even by the ludicrous landslides often claimed across the Arab world, the Iraqi leader was sworn in for a fresh seven-year term, seemingly convinced that he had delivered a decisive message to Mr. Bush.

Then, last Sunday, Mr. Hussein abruptly decreed freedom for 20,000 political prisoners and common criminals at Abu Ghraib, Iraq's most notorious jail, and for tens of thousands of others at prisons across the country. Iraqi state television replayed carefully edited videotape of the emptying out of the prisons, interspersed with benign-looking images of Mr. Hussein and of choirs singing anthems in his praise. All this was meant to persuade Iraqis that Mr. Hussein, far from the merciless hierarch who has paralyzed this country with fear, is, to the contrary, the fount of magnanimity and tolerance.

In case the message was not already clear, one of Mr. Hussein's closest aides, Tariq Aziz, who is a Christian, pressed it home in an interview when he compared the Iraqi leader's move to the forgiveness shown by Jesus on the Cross. Mr. Aziz, a curiously deflated figure who has been included on a list of possible war criminals by the Bush administration, claimed the prison amnesty had nothing to do with President Bush's threat, backed up by Britain, to go to war over Iraq's alleged attempts to develop nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and charges that Mr. Hussein has been in league with Al Qaeda.

''I swear to you, when we discussed this decision, nobody mentioned George W. Bush or Tony Blair or Amnesty International or anybody else,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''It is just a love affair between the Iraqi people and their leader.''

But whatever the convoluted constructs that issue from the inner circle in Baghdad, the reality is that this would not be the first time Mr. Hussein had made a sudden, startling reversal, just when he most needed to mask his real intentions and sow confusion among his adversaries.

In the Persian Gulf war, Mr. Hussein switched repeatedly between sweeping vows never to abandon Kuwait and hints at concessions, hoping all the while that a breach in the American coalition would save them. When war came, the Iraqis held on for barely six weeks, then abruptly withdrew their forces in headlong flight back to Iraq.

This time, the biggest concessions have been at home. The prison release appears to have been an attempt, late in the day, to show that Mr. Hussein himself is capable of reform. A particular audience for the move may have been the country's majority Shiite Muslims, about 60 percent of the population, and its Kurdish minority of about 15 percent. These two groups have been at the forefront of underground opposition movements and are the most numerous among those whom Mr. Hussein, who is from the Sunni Arab minority, has sent to the gallows. At the end fo the week, Mr. Hussein ordered a cancellation of the $200 fee charged to all Iraqis wishing to go abroad -- at 50 times a working man's monthly income, effectively a prohibition for most people on leaving Iraq.
Abroad, Mr. Hussein has sought to rally Arab opinion to Iraq's side in recent weeks by recognizing Kuwait's sovereignty and promising not to invade its neighbor again. He also returned to Kuwait 100 tons of state archives Iraq stole in 1991, including the personal papers of Kuwait's ruler. He has made public promises of payments to the families of Palestinian suicide bombers, and broken his years of seclusion by meeting in Baghdad with a succession of Arab emissaries and journalists. His reward has been a solid front of opposition across the Arab world to an American attack.

But not all of these initiatives have gone smoothly. The return of Kuwait's archives drew attention to a far more grievous claim, unmet by Iraq, for the return of 605 people, mostly Kuwaitis, who were seized by the Iraqis in Kuwait and never seen again. A bid to improve relations with Qatar went badly awry when the gulf state's foreign minister, Sheik Hamad bin Jasem bin Jaber al-Thani, came to Baghdad recently, and, diplomats say, offered Mr. Hussein and his family asylum in Qatar if he would step down to avoid a war. Diplomats said Mr. Hussein ended the meeting forthwith and ordered the Qatari official to leave Iraq.

Similarly, the attempt to cut a new, gentler image at home seems to have come rapidly unstuck. Many Iraqis were openly contemptuous of the decision to release thousands of unrehabilitated murderers and thieves onto their streets. Within 24 hours of the amnesty, women in the black cloaks of widows, and other angry family members, staged small demonstrations in Baghdad demanding to know the whereabouts or burial place of thousands of political prisoners who did not emerge when the cells were opened. With Western reporters watching, Mr. Hussein's secret police did not arrest or shoot the protesters, as they have on similar occasions in the past. But security was immediately tightened across Baghdad and other cities, especially in the overwhelmingly Shiite south.

Concerns were so acute at one point during the protests that a government ''minder'' assigned to accompany a reporter and photographer for The New York Times at all times outside their hotel instructed them to ''cancel'' an article about the protests that had been published earlier that day. ''It was not official news, so it must be canceled,'' he said.

Perhaps most disturbing for Mr. Hussein, Baghdad was swept by other manifestations of dissent. There were whispers that underground organizations were stirring again among the Shiites. Several Iraqis said scores of Baath Party members had mailed their membership cards to party headquarters in recent weeks, apparently in a bid to distance themselves from Mr. Hussein should an American invasion come.

With a membership of about 500,000, the party has a monopoly on virtually all top positions in the government, armed forces and state security agencies -- the very apparatus of fear that has kept Mr. Hussein in power. In the past, quitting the party at a time of crisis for Mr. Hussein would have been seen as treachery, and treated as such. But now, apparently, those mailing in their cards have chosen to take that risk in the hope of avoiding something still more menacing -- the specter of the kind of vengeance killings that have been seen elsewhere when brutal oligarchies have come tumbling down.