THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Amid Brutal Poverty in Iraq, A Favored Few Enjoy Riches
By John F. Burns
Dec. 31, 2002


Perhaps the keenest measure of impoverishment in Saddam Hussein's Iraq can be taken from the scenes at places like Liberation Square in central Baghdad.

For 30 years, the square has had a chilling place in the collective memory of most Iraqis, as the site of the public hangings, in January 1969, of nine Iraqi Jews and five other Iraqis accused of spying for Israel. Their gallows were inspected, just before the hangings, by Mr. Hussein, then vice president, who toured the square in an open car.

These days, Liberation Square -- like similar sites in all Iraqi cities -- has been transformed into a vast flea market. Here, the sellers -- of household bric-a-brac, of plumbing fixtures, of postcards and old magazines, of 45- and 78-r.p.m. records, of plastic sandals, of anything with even vestigial monetary value -- are not the illiterate underclass so much as the newly destitute middle class.

On one recent morning, a visitor strolling the sidewalks met lawyers, engineers, teachers, writers, musicians and doctors, some of them jobless, others seeking a few extra dollars to augment salaries rendered virtually worthless by a devaluation of the Iraqi dinar of around 8,000 percent over 20 years.
One of the most poignant stories was that of Fuad Zeiki Ibrahim, a handsome, gray-haired man of 45, who said he had been captured early in the Iran-Iraq war and spent eight years in an Iranian military prison before returning in 1990 to a veteran's pension equivalent to about $4 a month.

On this, he said, he was trying to support a family of seven. Mr. Ibrahim dispensed with the usual praise of Mr. Hussein, whose beaming portrait, on a concrete plinth, looked down as he spoke. ''My life has no meaning; when I came home, I found that there was nothing left for me here in my country,'' he said.

Not far away from the square, at Baghdad's thriving car market in the Murad Arusafa district on the city's east side, showrooms are filled bumper-to-bumper with luxury cars. Eager salesmen offer a brand new, gleaming Landcruiser for $42,000; a top-of-the-line Mercedes-Benz for $72,000. A vintage Ferrari is also available, along with new Porsches and a Lamborghini.

Saddam Hussein's Iraq is a place of brutal and potentially explosive social divisions. Among the country's 22 million people, a favored few have access to the most extravagant luxuries. In general, most seem blithely indifferent to others' suffering in a society where a vast majority of people have been reduced to penury by two decades of war and sanctions.

The sanctions, requiring United Nations approval for Iraq's imports of medicines and other goods, were imposed after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 and have continued until now, pending resolution of the dispute over Iraq's banned-weapons programs.

For any visitor spending a few weeks in Iraq, it is this contrast in lifestyles between Mr. Hussein's elite and other Iraqis that seems as telling a characteristic of the society as any other, besides a pervasive climate of fear with no obvious counterpart in any country, except possibly North Korea.

In this atmosphere of dread, with Iraqis forever terrified that their dissident thoughts will attract the attention of Mr. Hussein's secret police, the self-indulgence of those with favored positions has echoes, for an outsider, of Bob Fosse's 1972 movie ''Cabaret,'' with its depiction of the decadence in mid-1930's Berlin that accompanied the rise of Hitler.

Much of the decadence in Iraq is out of sight, or, at best, barely glimpsed by those not within the elite. Those inside the country who speak of it do so in anxious whispers, and those outside who tell of it are mostly people who have taken flight from Mr. Hussein's rule.

In these circumstances, sorting fact from rumor is all but impossible. Still, there has been little variance over the years in the accounts of sinister goings-on -- many of them involving coerced women, sexual excess and violence -- that filter out of the villas and palaces of those who have the protection of Mr. Hussein.

But even taken on the evidence visible to all Iraqis, what has developed in Mr. Hussein's 23 years in power is a society of social and economic extremes.

If any incident in recent weeks captured this more powerfully than others, it was on the day in October when the Iraqi leader staged a one-candidate referendum, featuring himself, that was officially announced as having produced a 100 percent ''yes'' vote among the 11 million Iraqis who turned out to endorse a new seven-year term.

On referendum day, Iraqi state television showed the president's eldest son, Uday Saddam Hussein, who is the focus of many of the more lurid stories circulating in Baghdad about excessive behavior within the ruling elite, casting his ballot.
The younger Mr. Hussein, 38, was shown driving up to the polling station in a late-model Rolls-Royce Corniche, one of the world's most expensive cars, and handing his ballot through the driver's window, in seigneurial style, to a boy assigned to place it in the box.

It was the sort of show-off gesture that has been shunned by the younger brother, Qusay, 36, who has lived more modestly, or at least less visibly, and has won favor as his father's heir apparent.

With the universal vows of fealty to Mr. Hussein and his sons that have been achieved by years of terror, it is a matter of surmise how such behavior goes down among millions of impoverished Iraqis.

Until matters started to spiral downward with Mr. Hussein's decision to start an eight-year war with Iran in 1980, and the disastrous invasion of Kuwait that followed in 1990, Iraq's oil revenues -- at $26.5 billion in 1980, nearly three times the level of 20 years later -- had made it one of the wealthiest Arab countries, with striking successes in health care, education, sanitation, agriculture, employment and a fast-growing urban middle class.

Now, the levels of social distress are pitiable.

In Saddam City, a sprawling slum on Baghdad's outskirts that is home to a teeming population of about two million Shiite Muslims, small children can be seen clambering amid mountains of refuse at garbage dumps looking for scraps of food or other salvageable items for barter.

In recent months, Western reporters asking for permission from the Information Ministry to visit Saddam City have frequently been refused, apparently because of concerns that they might stumble across pockets of dissent, or even underground resistance groups, which have found a breeding ground among Shiites who are a majority in Iraq but mostly excluded from power by the Sunni Muslim minority represented by Mr. Hussein.

Begging is common, everywhere, among tousled street urchins, mothers with infants clutched to their breast, widows in black cloaks and scarves and toothless old men.
But another country, and another Baghdad also exist. In up-market districts like Arasat, Karada and Mansour, money can buy almost any luxury. Merchants offer Armani suits, Escada blouses, L'Oréal perfumes, Sony digital television sets, Burberry scarves, $2,500 American-made, double-door refrigerators and $20,000 swimming pools as big as small lagoons.

Cruising down the main shopping streets at night are expensively groomed men and women in Mercedes-Benzes, Jaguars and BMW's, many of whom make their purchases from wads of American dollars, and return home to sprawling villas that brood behind steel gates guarded by men with Kalashnikov rifles.

In Iraq, people like this rarely give interviews, so where their money comes from is a matter for speculation. But less favored Iraqis have little trouble providing theories.

While war and sanctions destroyed many legitimate businesses, those Iraqis say, they created boundless opportunities for black-marketeering that were quickly monopolized by those with connections to the most powerful men in the land.

One of the most lucrative enterprises has been oil smuggling, in tankers that run to Syria, Jordan and Turkey, earning billions of dollars in revenues that outflank the controls on Iraq's main oil sales.

The best vantage points for watching the beneficiaries of this wealth are the swank restaurants that line the main streets of Arasat and Karada. There, in glitzy interiors with marbled fountains, and in alfresco settings around crystal-clear pools, diners can choose from thick menus that offer European and Arab specialties, and relax to live music.

On a stroll through Arasat on a balmy evening, the sight of the shoppers and diners and the young tyros in their open-topped sports cars was too much, ultimately, for an Information Ministry ''minder'' who had spent weeks in a relentless advocacy of everything wrought by Mr. Hussein.

Asking to be excused, the man said he felt unwell at the thought of having to support his family on a monthly salary of about $50 while a minority privileged by their links to the powerful indulged themselves so conspicuously. ''It is gangster business,'' he said, as he turned on his heels to depart. ''Gangster business, pure and simple.''

In a society run on such grounds, human lives can easily be subordinated to political and personal expediency. In one Baghdad cancer ward, an 11-year-old boy lay stick thin and pasty of complexion, his lymphocytic leukemia untreated for want of the drugs commonly used in chemotherapy treatment.

On the ward, the Iraqi doctor gave the explanation Mr. Hussein's government has offered for a decade: that the sanctions had blocked the import of necessary cancer drugs.

It is an allegation rejected by Washington, which has said that Iraq has been free to order any cancer drugs it needs.

But something in the doctor's uneasy manner suggested he might have something else to say, so a visitor asked if he could discuss his own experience with lymphoma privately, away from the minder monitoring the conversation.

Over the minder's protests, the doctor agreed. Retreating to a tiny, windowless office, he closed the door, sat down, and spoke hurriedly, in German, at barely a whisper. Pointing to the walls, he drew a finger across his throat, indicating he was speaking at risk of his life.

When the visitor asked him whether the drugs required were not available in Baghdad's thriving black market for medical drugs, the doctor said: almost all cancer drugs are available, but at a cost.
In the boy's case, he said, the cycles of chemotherapy required would have cost $2,500, an unimaginable sum for the parents of the boy, a $15-a-month soldier in Mr. Hussein's army and his wife. And so, he said, the boy would die, probably within a day or two.

What if a stranger were to go to the black market and buy the drugs? Again, the doctor drew his finger across his throat. In Iraq, he seemed to be saying, even acts of charity can be construed as conspiracy against the state.