A NATION AT WAR: THE IRAQI CAPITAL; Iraqi Defense Chief Vows Fight, Predicting Baghdad Clash in Days
By John F. Burns
March 28, 2003

Iraq's defense minister said today that American forces could encircle ''great parts of Baghdad'' in as little as 5 to 10 days, but that the ensuing battle could last as long as two months, perhaps longer, with paramilitary groups loyal to Saddam Hussein joining regular troops to mount a street-by-street defense of this city of five million people.

''For us, Baghdad will become the cemetery where the enemy will be buried,'' the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim, said at a news conference. ''God willing, we will teach the United States and the British and their allies a lesson they will never forget.''

The warning came as American aircraft resumed their attacks on Baghdad with some of the heaviest strikes of the eight-day-old war. Sorties throughout the day were followed, around midnight, with explosions of such momentous power that the entire city shook. Car alarms were set off as far as 10 miles from the blasts, and mosques, on Saddam Hussein's orders, began their nightly ritual of amplified calls to God.

''Allah u Akbar! Allah u Akbar!'' -- ''God is Great -- the muezzins cried plaintively deep into the night, in the words of the most sacred of Muslim prayers.

After the trembling of the ground, and reverberations that ran like shivers through the concrete frame of the Palestine Hotel about a mile from the blasts across the Tigris river, the city fell silent again for 5, sometimes 10 or 15 minutes.

Then there were more roars from the engines of cruise missiles as they streaked low across the city for 30 or 40 seconds, more blasts, and more satanic bursts of flame, followed by huge clouds of dust and smoke drifting down the river on the night wind.

The impacts appeared to be concentrated on the west bank of the river in the city center, site of many of the buildings considered central to Mr. Hussein's power. Pentagon officials said the targets included command-and-control centers as well as telecommunications hubs.

Bombs and missiles last Friday night struck mostly totemic targets, including two of Mr. Hussein's favorite palaces, the massive blocklike building housing his presidential office, and Republican Guard quarters.

Any certainty about which buildings were struck tonightawaited dawn, when Western reporters moving about the city under government guide would have their first opportunity to look for newly blasted structures in the heavily guarded compounds where the most secret agencies work.

On Wednesday night, the Pentagon demonstrated a new focus when it scored a direct hit on a telecommunications building, depriving Mr. Hussein's government of landline telephone service.

The site lay immediately adjacent to the tallest building in Iraq, the 700-foot high Saddam Tower, which appeared to suffer only shattered windows at its base. The tower, with a bulblike structure at mid-level that houses a popular restaurant, became a symbol of Mr. Hussein's defiance when it was destroyed by an American missile strike in the Persian Gulf war of 1991, then rebuilt with a statue of Mr. Hussein at its base.

The platform supporting the statue features a scattering of American missile fragments. Bronze medallions of the first President Bush and Margaret Thatcher, the former British prime minister, are embedded at the statue's feet. Wedding parties routinely stop at the statue, seemingly for the purpose of reaffirming the loyalty of newlyweds and their families to Mr. Hussein.

Only days before the new war began, a Sudanese elevator operator in the tower inquired nervously of visiting Westerners whether the needlelike structure was likely to be destroyed again. But this time, Pentagon targeters succeeded in sparing the tower even as they struck the blocklike building of about 10 stories that sits perhaps 100 to 150 feet awayto the tower's side, housing a key telephone exchanges.

At daybreak, telephones across much of the western side of the city had gone dead, and the shattered telecommunications structure was a hollowed-out shell, with great steel panels and other interior fittings petalled outward by the blast from about the sixth floor down to the ground.

One building that reported having lost its phones was Al Rashid, the most favored of the city's five-star hotels in normal times, but largely abandoned in the past week after warnings from the Pentagon that a potential target, a telecommunications node, was buried deep beneath the hotel.

For the people of Baghdad, the intensified bombing added to mounting anxieties about what lies ahead. Only a little more than a week after the first missile strike, failed to kill Mr. Hussein and other top leaders, American troops and armor have traveled more than 200 miles across the desert from Kuwait, to forward positions between the Euphrates and the Tigris that lie as little as 50 miles from Baghdad.

On Thursday night, 1,000 more American troops parachuted onto a Kurdish-controlled airfield about 200 miles north of Baghdad, opening a northern front to draw pressure off American troops in the south.

For Mr. Hussein's government, the vise is tightening, on the ground and from the air. But the closer the might of the American ground troops approaches to Baghdad, and the more intense the city's bombing, the more Mr. Hussein and top officials profess to be ready -- eager, even -- for a climactic showdown with America. On its face, any matchup between two nations with such vastly different military and economic resources might seem, at least to all but the most zealous of Mr. Hussein's associates, like a chronicle foretold.

But the defense minister's remarks tonight, and similar pronouncements in recent days, convey a sense that Mr. Hussein and his inner circle believe that the United States has made a catastrophic mistake in underestimating Iraq's ability to strike back.

The message from the Mr. Hashim, the defense minister, was that Iraq has been content from the start to wait for American troops to march north -- harassing American columns as they flank cities like Basra, Nasariya, Samawa, Najaf and Karbala, ambushing, capturing and killing American soldiers as opportunities arise -- until the moment when they arrive at the gates of Baghdad.

At his news conference, General Hashim adopted the tone of a military professional as he ran through a detailed briefing on the war so far, as viewed by Iraq. As a veteran of Iraq's eight-year war with Iran in the 1980's, he is regarded by many Iraqis as a more reliable voice on the progress of the current fighting than the political elite around Mr. Hussein, who have a habit of falling quickly into the vengeful polemics about ''villains'' and ''criminals'' favored by the Iraqi leader.

For the second time in five days, General Hashim appeared in a hotel conference room, with a staff officer directing a pointer at red stickers on a large military map. By the general's account, American officers have shaded the truth, understating the severity of the challenge they have met from the Iraqis at every encounter since the first American troops moved into Iraq before dawn last Thursday.

General Hashim went town by town, at some points even junction by junction, bridge by bridge, telling of Iraq's success in harassing the American battalions. He mocked American and British assertions that coalition troops have been in control of the port of Umm Qasr, on the Kuwait border, saying they have never advanced beyond the docks, and hold no part of the town.

His account of the battles at Fao, Basra, Nasiriya, Samawa and Najaf were a litany of the ''enemy'' pushing forward, then being driven back, losing vehicles and men in virtually every major encounter.

''The enemy seems to lose trust in himself, and the whole world can see how Western leaders have deceived themselves,'' he said. ''If you go back five or six days to look at their pronouncements before the aggression began, they were giving various predictions of a war lasting five, six, seven or perhaps eight days. Now, they are talking of a much longer war. After Umm Qasr and Fao and Nasiriya and Samawa and Najaf, you can see for yourself how those pronouncements have changed.''

The minister acknowledged Iraqi losses in the battles, and implied without giving figures that they have been heavy, especially under heavy American bombing. But he said Iraq had ample reserves of fighters, and that, in any case, American officers exaggerated the losses sustained when heavy bombers are sent to pound front-line troops.

But mainly, his argument was that Iraq has successfully exploited several advantages in the fighting, by using irregular troops who have been able to ambush the Americans and surprise them in other ways, and by its fighters' knowledge of their home terrain, and their reliance on simpler weaponry.

He drew an analogy to an uprising among Iraqi tribesmen against British troops occupying Iraq after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire. ''In the 1920 uprising, Iraqis threw out the British with very primitive weapons,'' he said. ''And now, the level of our weapons compared with the enemy's are well known. But God willing, we, too, will throw our enemies out of Iraq.''

The crux of the war, though, he said, would be the battle for Baghdad. He conceded, in effect, that the American columns pushing north would eventually push past Iraqi units and reach Baghdad. ''Our defenses are set to defend Baghdad, so we won't be surprised if in 5 or 10 days the enemy will be encircling great parts of Baghdad,'' he said. ''Up to now, he has been able to bypass the towns along the way and go on into the desert, but in the end he will have to attack Baghdad. The important thing is, whether he reaches Baghdad today or tomorrow, he will have paid a very high price already. And our policy will remain what it has been from the start -- to minimize our own losses and inflict maximum casualties.''

Once the battle lines are set outside the capital, the minister said, the American forces would be confronted by a large defensive force of Republican Guard divisions, augmented by irregular units. The struggle for the capital could continue, he said, ''for 10 days, or two months, or even more,'' with intensive street fighting, but eventual victory would lie with the Iraqis. ''As you know, Baghdad is the capital of an ancient civilization,'' he said. ''We Iraqis inherited this history from our forefathers. Anybody who seeks to usurp this inheritance will be inviting God's wrath. So I can assure you that Baghdad will be impenetrable for the Americans and the British, for as long as any sons of the city remain alive.''