A NATION AT WAR: THE IRAQI CAPITAL; HUSSEIN RALLIES IRAQI DEFENDERS TO HOLD CAPITAL
By John F. Burns
March 25, 2003

With their confidence visibly bolstered by five days of fighting that has shown Iraqi troops offering stiffer resistance than expected, Iraq's leaders resurfaced today in a contemptuous, even cocksure mood and challenged American forces to push on across the last 50 or 60 miles of desert toward a decisive showdown in Baghdad.

President Saddam Hussein, silent since shortly after an American bombing raid in the first airstrikes last week, appeared on television in a 25-minute speech aimed at further stiffening Iraqi defenses. He said American and British forces were ''in real trouble right now'' after soldiers were killed, captured or taken prisoner on the drive north from Kuwait.

''Hold against them,'' Mr. Hussein told groups of paramilitary fighters who have harassed the allied invaders. ''Hit them hard. Hit them with all force and accuracy.''

Iraq's aim, Mr. Hussein said, should be to drag out the war, denying the United States and Britain the quick victory they planned and dragging them into ''this quagmire.''

''Today we are standing in a position that would please a friend and anger an enemy and all the infidels,'' he said. ''But we are going to be victorious and we are causing them to suffer.

''These are your decisive days,'' he added. ''Hit now. According to what? According to what God has ordered you to do -- 'Cut their throats, and be patient.' ''

After some American officials had suggested Mr. Hussein might have been seriously injured or killed in the airstrikes that began the war, his appearance had the effect of steadying the government, at least for now. After the speech, officials who had worried privately about a possible collapse of authority began talking as if the capture of the city could be held off for weeks or even months.

After the speech came a news conference by Tariq Aziz, the deputy prime minister who has been Mr. Hussein's principal voice to the world for more than a decade. He, too, was rumored to have been killed or hurt in the bombing last week.

Mr. Aziz, 71, the fourth man in the governing hierarchy, strolled into a hotel on the Tigris River embankment fingering a Havana cigar and mocked American officials who had suggested that the air raid had ''decapitated'' the Iraqi leadership.

''They made a great fuss about an attack on a site where they said His Excellency, President Saddam Hussein, and our leadership were meeting, and they wanted to decapitate the Iraqi leadership as if we were a bunch of chickens,'' Mr. Aziz said.

He added: ''All members of the Iraqi leadership with the exception of one member who was martyred in the battle for Najaf are all alive and in good shape.''

The man killed, according to an announcement tonight, was Naif Shindak, the leader of the governing Baath Party in Najaf, a city along the American drive north. No details of how he was killed were given, but the fact that the fighting had involved the party leader in Najaf, a holy city for Iraq's majority Shiite Muslim population, confirmed the crucial role in the Iraqi defense that has been assigned to Baath Party fighters, tribal militias, and other irregular troops who are intensely loyal to Mr. Hussein.

Emphasizing the role of these men over that of the regular army, the Iraqis made much today of their assertion that an Apache helicopter was brought down near Najaf by an elderly farmer firing a Czech-made rifle. The man, identified as Ali Obeid, was shown on Iraqi television wearing a checkered headdress, with the helicopter in the background.

Mr. Aziz said he had been watching the war on the Western television channels available on the satellite systems available to the Iraqi elite but denied to ordinary people here. From those reports, he said, he had learned that British commanders had referred to the Iraqi units still holding out in the port city of Umm Qasr, just across the border from Kuwait, as ''pockets of resistance.'' He chuckled, then used the moment to sketch out how the Iraqis had held up American and British forces at Umm Qasr, Fao, Basra and Nasiriya -- and how they envisioned defending Baghdad.

''The U.K. says 'pockets of resistance' -- yes, they are pockets, but very dangerous pockets for the enemy,'' he said. ''What is important is that they are there. What is not to be expected is that Iraqi officers will appear with their men in large columns in daylight so that they can easily be picked off by the American airplanes and helicopters. Yes, they fight in their own way. What is important is that they fire, they kill, they threaten the existence of the enemy.''

Of all the Iraqi battles with the coalition forces so far, the Baghdad leadership has been proudest of the fighting in Umm Qasr, perhaps because it was the first target of the invading land forces, and also because it is a town of a few thousand inhabitants that depends on oil-loading terminals and cargo docks.
Mr. Hussein, in his address, mentioned by name several officers who led the resistance in Umm Qasr. ''I would like you to remember their names by heart,'' he said.

The Iraqi units' success in holding out for days against British troops in at least some districts of the town appears to make Baghdad's leaders feel that the strategy could be the template for the fighting in Baghdad, a city of 4.5 million people that stretches for more than 30 miles across the desert.

Mr. Aziz said the idea of making a stand in Umm Qasr had come from Mr. Hussein himself.

Now, Mr. Aziz said, he had heard Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of American forces in the war, saying allied forces would be bypassing Basra, the southern oil city that lies about 30 miles north of Umm Qasr, rather than fighting their way in.

''It reminded me of the old story about the fox and the grapes,'' he said. ''When a man asked the fox why he would not eat the grapes, the fox said it was because they were too sour. I think Tommy Franks made a judgment that if it took so long to conquer the small town of Umm Qasr, how long will it take to capture the great city of Basra?''

Sounding almost boastful, Mr. Aziz ticked off what he said were the fallacies that had lured President Bush and Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, to war: the notion that Saddam Hussein was ''totally isolated, and that he has no support''; that Iraqi defenders would run away as soon as American and British troops crossed the border; that the Shiite Muslims who predominate in southern Iraq would abandon the government at the first moment of the war, and welcome the invading forces; and that the only people prepared to fight for Mr. Hussein would be members of his own clan from around the north-central city of Tikrit.

''In just a few days, all these false assumptions have dramatically collapsed,'' he said. On top of this, he said, American and British officials had resorted, after the war started, to untruths. ''It's a shame, really it's a shame, and it's a catastrophe for their people, that they have taken this cheap way, this ignorant way, to lie to the people of the world.''

Some Bush administration officials who saw Mr. Hussein's speech suggested it might have been recorded before the war began. But Iraqis said they had no doubt that the broadcast was fresh, mainly because of Mr. Hussein's emphasis on Iraqi troops' successes -- hard to predict only a few days ago.

As with the Thursday speech, Mr. Hussein appeared to be in a bunker, with a rough wooden lectern and what appeared to be a white sheet as a backdrop, along with an Iraqi flag.

But this time, he seemed more like his coldly assured old self. In the Thursday broadcast, right after the American attempt to kill him, he seemed shaken. Today, he looked composed in his uniform, and read steadily from pages of large typescript, without glasses.

Mr. Aziz, ticking off another fallacy he said was being put out by Iraq's enemies, said there were those who have described Mr. Hussein as losing control. He laughed again.

''If the leader of Iraq really is losing control, how can the resistance continue as it has the last few days?'' he said. ''Saddam Hussein is in full control of the country, of the armed forces, of the Iraqi people, of all the Iraqi resources, and of the Arab Baath Socialist Party -- and we other leaders are with him, we are in full control.''

Mr. Aziz also rebuked the Bush administration for its demand that Iraq observe the Geneva Convention in its treatment of the American soldiers captured on Saturday night when they made a wrong turn outside Nasiriya.

He said that Iraq had always observed the Geneva Convention, and that its treatment of the Americans was better than the treatment meted out to Iraqis captured by the Americans -- many of whom, he said, were civilians and thus held in breach of the same treaty.

''What did we do? We showed American prisoners of war sitting on sofas,'' he said. ''The Iraqi prisoners of war were not sitting on sofas, they were forced to sit on the ground, and their hands were tied behind their backs. All we asked the Americans were their rank, their name, their serial numbers, and their city. These are all regular, normal questions.''

As for American anger over the Iraqi TV film of the dead Americans lying on a bare concrete floor, with visible bullet wounds, Mr. Aziz said this, too, was nonsense. ''The dead were shown as dead, you cannot show them in coffins on the battlefield, and you have to show them as they are.'' At one moment in the film, an Iraqi is shown dismissively turning over one of the dead Americans by his shoulder.

The Iraqi official appeared to relish the prospect of a battle for Baghdad. Paraphrasing a remark by Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld that American troops would be greeted in the Iraqi capital with music and flowers, he said: ''They are welcome, if they want to come to Baghdad, instead of moving in the desert. They will be greeted with the best music they ever heard, and the best flowers from all over Iraq.'' To a European reporter who asked what the battle for might be like, he replied, ''Stay in Baghdad, and watch what will happen.''