THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE POLL; Poll Finds Unease on Terror Fight And Concerns About War on Iraq
By Adam Clymer and Janet Elder
Sept. 8, 2002


Americans increasingly doubt that their government has done enough to protect them against terrorist attacks and are convinced, despite misgivings, that there will be a war against Iraq, the latest New York Times/CBS News poll shows. Majorities do not want war without Congressional and allied support first and a clear explanation from President Bush.

One year after the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, about half of the public said the Bush administration did not have a clear plan to fight terrorism, and nearly as many said they felt somewhat uneasy and not safe from another terrorist attack.

A quarter of the public, but a third of those in the Northeast, said they feared an attack in their area. One American in 10 said the administration had made ''a lot of progress'' in eliminating terrorist threats from nations besides Afghanistan.

The survey portrayed a hesitant nation with a sense of inevitability and little of the eager combativeness that surrounded the reaction to the bombing of terrorist targets in Afghanistan last year. A large majority said it expected the American forces to ''end up fighting against Iraq.''

One-fourth said Iraq presented such a grave threat that the United States should act now, while two-thirds said the nation needed to wait for support from its allies. Another big majority said Mr. Bush should get Congressional approval before making war.

The troubled answers about the campaign against terrorism at home and abroad conveyed a similar fatalistic, slightly cranky mood. A year ago, three-fifths of Americans said the government had done enough to protect them against another terrorist attack; now two-fifths do. That drop in confidence was mirrored in follow-up interviews.

Mary Wool, a retired store owner in St. Louis, said she objected to ''the whole thing at airports, going through your luggage.'' She said: ''I don't think they are serious. It's just harassment and to make people think they are doing something.''

Such worries highlighted the importance of President Bush's speech to the United Nations on Thursday, in which he plans to set forth his reasons for regarding Iraq as an international menace. Sixty-four percent of the 937 adults interviewed by telephone last Monday through Thursday said the Bush administration had not clearly explained its position. Even 57 percent of those who said they thought an attack was needed now expressed that sentiment.

Mr. Bush's overall approval rating remains strong. Sixty-three percent said they approved of his handling of his job as president. That still represented a drop from 70 percent in mid-July and the mid-80's recorded last fall and winter. That rating was accompanied by a sharp drop in approval of his handling of foreign policy, to 54 percent from 68 percent in July, and by slight declines in support for his handling of the economy and the war on terrorism. The poll's margin of sampling error was plus or minus three percentage points.

The respondents said they thought the Bush administration was making ''some'' progress rather than ''a lot'' on goals Mr. Bush had set out for the war on terrorism. These goals included closing terrorist camps and establishing a stable government in Afghanistan, eliminating terrorist threats from other countries, making air travel safe and improving America's image in the Arab world.

Capturing or killing Osama bin Laden remains a benchmark of sorts for success in Afghanistan. Three-quarters of the poll's respondents said they think he is still alive; 61 percent said the United States will not have won the war in Afghanistan unless he is captured or killed.

The survey did not test political attitudes in depth, but offered some troubling signs for the president's party in the midterm elections.

Thirty-seven percent of all respondents said they trusted the government to make the right decisions all or most of the time, down from 55 percent, the highest measure in decades, recorded last October in the first flush of support for the beginning of the war on terrorism. Another political indicator showed a steady negative, as 43 percent said the nation was going in the right direction while 49 percent said it was seriously ''off on the wrong track.''

A generic question about how registered voters planned to vote for representatives in November showed a statistically insignificant Democratic edge of 41 percent to 37 percent, a gap too small to foretell results in the three dozen or so closely contested House races. But among voters 45 and older, who make up about three-fifths of the off-year electorate, Democrats did much better.

The public is ambivalent over the issue of a pre-emptive attack of the sort urged by Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld.

Half the respondents were asked whether the United States should attack ''another country'' if that country did not attack first, and 47 percent opposed such an attack, while 41 percent favored it if the United States thought that country might launch an attacK.
The other half were asked the same question, but with the word ''Iraq'' used instead of ''another country.'' Then 61 percent favored a pre-emptive strike and 26 percent opposed it. The margin of sampling error for each group was plus or minus five percentage points.

One respondent, Tom Tully of Columbus, Ohio, said, ''Every day we wait to attack, Saddam is building more chemical weapons, and some sources say he already has nuclear weapons.'' Mr. Tully, 35, an unemployed computer engineer, said: ''If not now, when? Might as well do it now than later when it gets more difficult.''

But Leona Miller, 75, a retired nurse and real estate agent in Bremerton, Wash., said: ''I oppose the attack on Iraq. George Bush is on a vendetta started by his father. It is getting-even stuff.''

Support for a war declined when the public was offered other alternatives or considerations. Fifty-six percent cautioned delay so that the United Nations could try to get weapons inspectors back in Iraq. When asked if they would favor war if it would last ''months or even years,'' 49 percent favored a war and 44 percent opposed it.

Sixty-two percent said the president ''should have to get the approval of Congress before taking military action against Iraq.'' Among those 65 and older, or old enough to recall World War II, 74 percent said Congressional approval was required. Still, the 62 percent figure was down from the 71 percent who said so in a CBS News poll early in August.

Women and the elderly were least enthusiastic about war. For example, while 27 percent of the public said the nation should go to war now without waiting for allied support, 21 percent of women and 10 percent of people 65 and older took that view.

The Sept. 11 attacks have not passed out of mind. Three-fifths of the public said they thought about them at least once a week, and a third said they talked about them that often.

Two out of five respondents said their lives had changed since the terrorist attacks, and four out of five said the country had changed.

David Lechner, 47, a printer in Huntingburg, Ind., spoke of both changes, saying: ''When I watched the trade center come down, tears ran down my face. It hit home that I'm no different from the rest of the people. I am conscious of it daily; it doesn't just come and go. But it made the nation 10 times stronger than it was. There is unity and strength.''

Cheryl Krusinski, the wife of an Air Force captain, was teaching second grade in Washington a year ago. ''They told us to lock our classrooms, that Washington was being attacked,'' Ms. Krusinski said. She said talking to her students, one of whom lost his father in the attack on the Pentagon, was ''emotional,'' and she continually relived the experience. She said that day had re-emphasized the importance of her husband's occupation. ''I know he'll be going and that has big emotional impact, but I realize it's for a greater purpose, to protect our country.''

The view that the government had not done enough to protect Americans against terrorism held fairly steady across various demographic groups. Monica Sanders, 21, a college student from Modesto, Calif., said that airport security alone was not enough. ''All other forms of transportation should be checked,'' she said. ''There are terrorists in the country who could do something on a highway or a train.''

Vic Stinnett, 35, a welder in Mountain Home, Idaho, said, ''The government could do things like background checks on people who go in and out of the country.'' He added, ''A thumbprint or fingerprint scan would be a good idea.''

Louise Steward, 67, a retired bank worker in Tampa, Fla., said: ''The only way we would feel more secure would be to clean up all of Iraq and all of Afghanistan. We need to get our troops out there and clean up the mess. That is what the government should do: mop it up.''

How the Poll Was Conducted

The sample of telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges across the country.

Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete telephone number, thus permitting access to listed and unlisted numbers. Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey.

The results have been weighted to take into account household size and number of telephone lines in the residence and to adjust for variation in the sample relating to geographic region, sex, race, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results based on such samples will differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

For smaller subgroups the margin of sampling error is larger.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll. Variation in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results.