THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; A TOP IRAQI AIDE DEFIES U.S. TO FIND PROOF OF WEAPONS
By John F. Burns
Dec. 9, 2002



An Iraqi general who is a top adviser to President Saddam Hussein challenged the United States and Britain today to produce any evidence they have that Iraq still has any weapons of mass destruction or programs to develop them.

But he strongly implied that American intelligence has been right in contending that Iraq came close to building at least one Nagasaki-sized atom bomb by 1991, at the time of the Persian Gulf war.

Adopting a posture of punchy self-confidence and defiance, the Iraqi officer, Gen. Amir al-Saadi, said at a news conference that Iraq's 12,000-page declaration to the United Nations Security Council denying any banned weapons or programs was ''entirely accurate.''

The long declaration landed at United Nations offices in Vienna and New York, and arms experts immediately began the daunting job of determining whether the material reveals any illegal activity.

With the comments of General Saadi, Mr. Hussein seems to be gambling that the American threat of war will prove to be a bluff.

The Bush administration has alerted the C.I.A. and national laboratories to be ready to go into overdrive, homing in on a few crucial Iraqi claims that the United States believes it can show to be false. But in private, administration officials concede that there is no single piece of dramatic intelligence that Iraq has continued to try to acquire nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

General Saadi implied that Mr. Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who have led the pressures for Iraq to meet its disarmament obligations or face attack, will be shown to have no hard evidence.

''We hope they will be investigating, that it will satisfy them, because it's entirely accurate, it's truthful,'' General Saadi said, referring to the Iraqi declaration. It was produced under a 30-day Security Council deadline and handed over at the United Nations headquarters here on Saturday night, a day ahead of the United Nations' deadline of today.

With the declaration's mass of top-secret technical detail and its history of Iraq's weapons programs going back to the 1980's, it is expected to establish a new base line in the confrontation between the United States and Iraq, helping to settle one way or another whether there will be war.

''If they have anything to the contrary, let them come up with it to the Security Council,'' General Saadi said. United Nations inspectors are in Iraq hunting down any secret weapons programs that may survive; they are swooping down every day on plants, research institutes and laboratories suspected of harboring banned programs.

''Why play this game?'' General Saadi asked.

The United Nations weapons inspectors continued their daily missions today, visiting a government mining and survey company in Baghdad that has past association with uranium processing, and a pesticide plant west of Baghdad. Pesticide production can be converted to production of chemical weapons.

The Iraqi officer spoke mostly in English, aiming mainly at television audiences in the United States, but he took care to offer his rebuke to the Bush administration in Arabic, too.

''We don't understand the rush to judgment,'' he said. ''A superpower should study and take its time in judging, especially as everyone is looking on it as it prepares for a huge military campaign, for an aggression against Iraq. It should behave wisely.''

The Bush administration has said it intends to take time to analyze the documents, and no doubt will seize on the most startling of the admissions that came out of General Saadi's news conference: his suggestion of how far Iraq had progressed by 1991 toward acquiring a nuclear bomb.

All the work came to an end, he said, on Jan. 17, 1991, when the first President Bush ordered the bombing of Iraq to begin, five months after Iraq invaded Kuwait.

On that topic, the 64-year-old general, a chemical engineer who rose to become Mr. Hussein's most trusted lieutenant in the secret weapons hierarchy, seemed proud, even regretful, that the gulf war with the United States, and the bombing of Iraq's most coveted nuclear sites, had disrupted its most ambitious weapons venture of all.

The general was asked how close Iraq had come to acquiring a nuclear weapon. Speaking in English acquired during doctoral studies at the University of London in the 1960's, he replied, ''We haven't reached the final assembly of a bomb, nor tested it,'' and added, ''If you follow the documents we have given, there is no guarantee that you would succeed.''

Yet he danced close to the idea that considerable progress had been made. ''We don't know, it's for others to judge, it's for the International Atomic Energy Agency to judge, how close we were,'' he said. ''If I tell you we were close, it's subjective, maybe promotional.''

That Iraq made headway toward acquiring a nuclear weapon, and its cloak-and-dagger stratagems, has been chronicled in detail by the international atomic agency and the Central Intelligence Agency.

A C.I.A. report made public in October said Iraq began a crash program to build a bomb immediately after its invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, planning to divert highly enriched uranium from internationally safeguarded research reactors that France and the Soviet Union supplied.

A British government dossier published in September gave other details. It said that after the Kuwait occupation, Iraq planned to build a ''gas-centrifuge cascade'' to produce weapons-grade enriched uranium from a Soviet-made research reactor, also using fuel from the Osirak reactor that Israeli jets bombed in 1981. The British said the aim was to produce a bomb with a 20-kiloton yield, similar to the one dropped on Nagasaki in 1945.

But what made General Saadi's remarks the more stunning was that it was the first time any Iraqi official other than a defector had spoken so candidly, in public, about a project that would have made Iraq the Arab world's instant military superpower.

The general devoted much of the one-hour news conference to spelling out details of Iraq's nuclear program as described to the Security Council. He said that 2,081 pages of the declaration were devoted to nuclear weapons and that the declaration included sections on the two methods Iraq used to try to obtain a domestic supply of weapons-grade fuel, electromagnetic isotope separation and gas-centrifuge enrichment. He cited a passage on work to develop a ''trigger'' for the bomb and to achieve ''the final shaping of the device.''

He explained, ''In scientific jargon, 'device' means the bomb.''

General Saadi seemed well chosen for the role he played today. He is also one of the Iraqis most trusted by Mr. Hussein, whom he now serves with the title of presidential adviser.

He has an encyclopedic knowledge of the secret weapons programs and how far advanced they were -- in nuclear weapons, in deadly chemical and biological agents that were in the process of being ''weaponized'' and packed into bombs and missile warheads, and in missiles that were rapidly advancing to the stage where they could have achieved ranges of as much as 1,850 miles.

In the mid-1990's, when the crisis over Iraq's attempts to hide its weapons programs from United Nations inspections peaked, he was the official heading the Military Industrialization Commission, in overall charge of all the clandestine programs. In that position, he clashed frequently with the international weapons inspectors, as Iraqi denials that it had any banned programs, and the repertoire of harassment and obstruction faced by the inspectors, were swept away by United Nations discoveries of projects Baghdad had disclaimed.

The breakthrough came in 1995, when the military industrialization minister, Gen. Hussein Kamel, who was Mr. Hussein's son-in-law and General Saadi's immediate boss, defected to Jordan and, in debriefing sessions with C.I.A. experts, laid out a blueprint of the secret programs. General Kamel was later lured back to Baghdad and killed in a shootout at his sister's home.

General Saadi's remarks at the news conference were peppered with frustration at the work imposed on Iraq in compiling its dossier, and the threats made by the United States if it made a single mistake in accounting for its banned programs.

The general said the requirement that Iraq account for all so-called dual use programs and materials, meaning civilian enterprises that use processes and resources similar to the weapons projects, meant that Iraq had to list in the declaration thousands of undertakings that had nothing to do with weapons, like canneries, refineries, dairies and fertilizer factories.

''We are not even allowed one inaccuracy in this resolution,'' he said. ''It's a draconian resolution.''

Reporters focused many of their questions on attempts to get General Saadi to say whether the declaration contained any new disclosures. They inquired about any banned weapons or weapons programs that Iraq has not previously admitted to the United Nations inspectors, whether from 1991 to 1998, when the inspections regime collapsed in the face of Iraqi obstruction, or after 1998.

Iraq might have tried to avoid war by admitting it had some secret programs until recently, but had scrapped them all. That might have allowed Iraq to square its insistence in recent weeks that it has no secret programs with whatever fresh intelligence evidence the United States and Britain can bring forward.

General Saadi rejected that route, at least until an American television reporter posed the question about new programs for the third or fourth time. ''I recommend that you read the declaration,'' the general said, apparently sarcastically, because the declaration will not be made public for some days, if then. ''Is there new evidence?'' he asked. ''I'm not going to answer that.''

Despite American claims, the general insisted that biological weapons programs ''never existed after 1991.'' Yet later in the 1990's, United Nations inspectors uncovered an animal vaccine plant that had been diverted to producing botulinum.

He was similarly insistent about Iraq's production of VX gas, another deadly program uncovered by the inspectors in the 1990's. Of that program, he said, ''nothing still exists.''

Weapons inspectors hoped the declaration would settle what happened to 600 tons of ''precurs,'' materials Iraq had and could use in the production of VX gas. Weapons experts have said that much material would be enough to produce enough VX gas to kill the entire world population.