THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE MILITARY; War Plan Calls for Precision Bombing Wave to Break Iraqi Army Early in Attack
By Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker
Feb. 2, 2003

The Pentagon's war plan for Iraq calls for unleashing 3,000 precision-guided bombs and missiles in the first 48 hours of the opening air campaign, an effort intended to stagger and isolate the Iraqi military and quickly pave the way for a ground attack to topple a government in shock.

The initial bombardment would use 10 times the number of precision-guided weapons fired in the first two days of the Persian Gulf war of 1991, and the targets would be air defenses, political and military headquarters, communications facilities and suspected chemical and biological delivery systems, military and other Pentagon officials say.

Military planners said the immediate goals would be to break the Iraqi Army's will to fight, driving large number of troops to surrender or defect -- and offering them guarded sanctuary if they do -- while cutting off the leadership in Baghdad in hopes of causing a rapid collapse of the government of President Saddam Hussein.

The air campaign would be carried out by about 500 Air Force attack, radar-jamming and support planes flying from bases scattered throughout the gulf region and nearby, as well as by Navy planes from either four or five aircraft carriers, each carrying about 80 attack and support aircraft. About 300 American warplanes are already based at airfields north and south of Iraq. Two of the aircraft carriers are now stationed in the region, with two more scheduled to arrive within striking distance later this month.
The air war would be significant for what the targets will not be as much as for what they will be. Because the United States wants to help rebuild Iraq quickly after any conflict, the air campaign is intended to limit damage to Iraqi infrastructure and to minimize civilian casualties.

''The challenges in this air campaign will be to achieve certain military and psychological effects at the outset, but have as much of the infrastructure existing when it's over,'' said Gen. Ronald R. Fogleman, a former Air Force chief of staff who is a member of the Defense Policy Board, a panel that advises Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

The ground war would be carried out by two Army divisions and an expanded Marine Expeditionary Force.

The Army's Third Infantry Division and a sizable contingent of marines would be assigned to punch north from Kuwait, while a force spearheaded by the Fourth Infantry Division, whose tanks and armored fighting vehicles are equipped with the service's most sophisticated digital communications and target-acquisition systems, would move south from Turkey.

A large number of other Army forces with an array of capabilities -- including elements of the 82nd Airborne and 101st Airborne divisions -- would be assigned to special missions.
Administration officials are highly sensitive to political considerations in Turkey, and they refused to discuss negotiations over the use of bases with the government in Ankara.

But an assessment of troop deployment orders indicates a plan to send sizable heavy forces through Turkey and into Iraq, while keeping the number of American troops within Turkey at any one time within a cap set by the Turkish government.

Saudi Arabia has likewise presented a diplomatic challenge. Currently, no offensive air strike missions are expected to fly out of Saudi Arabia, but access to bases elsewhere in the region allowed the United States Central Command to structure a war plan that does not rely on Saudi territory to carry out attacks.

Just as the air campaign would rely on precision-guided munitions to an unprecedented extent, so, too, would the ground offensive build on the concept called maneuver warfare. The tactics would expand on those used in the 1989 invasion of Panama, when troops flew in, dropped onto and attacked more than two dozen separate targets almost simultaneously in the opening assault. The strategy, called vertical envelopment, was not central to the gulf war, when Army and Marine troops drove Iraq from Kuwait by chewing through the desert, mile by mile.

Pentagon and military officials said they expected Special Operations forces, including a large number of Rangers, and airborne troops to seize airfields and other targets deep within Iraq, relying on planes flying high-risk missions to ferry American armored vehicles to runways seized behind the lines of Iraqi regular troops. Those strikes would be backed up by Apache attack helicopters.

Military analysts say the plan's reliance on speed runs the risk of fighting forces outrunning their supply lines, particularly their fuel supplies. To address that concern, military logistics planners have been massing hundreds of huge tanker trucks at depots in Kuwait.

''This is not going to be your father's Persian Gulf war,'' said one senior Pentagon official.

Although some experimental weapons are expected to be used -- including high-powered microwave weapons that could flash millions of watts of electricity to cripple Iraqi computers and equipment -- the air campaign would shut down but not destroy important city services, like water and electricity, so they could more easily be restarted to minimize public health problems.

In the opening hours of the air campaign, Navy and Air Force jets, including B-2 stealth bombers, each carrying 16 one-ton satellite-guided bombs, and B-1 bombers, each carrying 24, would attack a range of targets from military command posts to air defense stations.

The Air Force has already stockpiled 6,700 satellite-guided bombs, called Joint Direct Attack Munitions, in the gulf region, as well as more than 3,000 laser-guided bombs, Air Force officials said.

Only 9 percent of the weapons dropped in the 1991 gulf war were precision-guided; this time, the figure would be well in excess of 75 percent, allowing more effective bombing with fewer total aircraft, officials say.

Air power advocates warn that unforeseen events could complicate the air campaign. Unseasonably bad weather forced allied pilots to cancel scores of bombing raids early in the 1991 gulf war, and the air campaign in Kosovo in 1999 took longer than planners projected, both because of weather and Yugoslav resilience.

Unlike the 39 days of bombing that preceded the 1991 ground war, this air campaign could be over in less than a week, military officials predicted. ''But we will emphasize flexibility and agility,'' one senior military officer said, adding that the timetable could be accelerated or prolonged depending on the Iraqi reaction.

While there is military utility in starting the ground offensive almost simultaneously with the air campaign, the decision is also in keeping with the Bush administration's broad information campaign to undermine the Iraqi government: the order for large numbers of American ground troops to move quickly into combat would demonstrate the seriousness of the offensive to the Iraqi military and public and show President Bush's determination to topple Mr. Hussein, officials say.

That style of attack would aim to thwart Iraqi forces from using chemical or biological weapons and prevent them from retreating into Baghdad and other cities to wage prolonged, bloody urban battles.

Special Operations forces would infiltrate Iraq early in the campaign to designate targets, to destroy Scud missiles, jam communications, disrupt Iraqi military operations and block or destroy storage areas holding weapons of mass destruction and their launching systems.

Remotely piloted aircraft, which passed their tests in the battlefield laboratory of Afghanistan, would play an important role in these missions. Besides the Predator and Global Hawk aircraft, the Army this week dispatched the smaller and more portable Hunter reconnaissance aircraft to the region.

''Enormous effort is being given to how we prevent him from doing things,'' said one senior Defense Department official, referring to Mr. Hussein. The official emphasized the military requirement of keeping the Iraqis from setting oil fields on fire, from flooding the southern marshes to slow an American assault and, in particular, from launching chemical or biological weapons at coalition forces, at an American ally in the region or even against their own people in an effort to blame the United States for attacks on civilians.

Up to 50,000 marines are expected to join the war, many making an early entry to ''establish a presence'' on the ground within Iraq, much as they did south of Kandahar during the war in Afghanistan. The fast-moving Marine forces, expected to flow in from the south with troops trained in urban combat procedures, would also join Army forces to lay siege and attack Baghdad should that be necessary.

More than 25,000 British forces, including armored and airborne troops, are moving toward the region, and would probably join American soldiers and marines in Kuwait.

As the Bush administration continues to apply diplomacy to disarm Iraq, senior officials say the American military will be in place by mid-February with enough force to carry out the war plan -- although commanders are prepared for any delays in a presidential decision to go to war.

Although the desert summer is hardly optimum for combat, especially when bulky chemical-biological warfare suits will be standard issue, the American military's technological monopoly in night vision devices allows its forces to fight at night, when it is cooler, making attacks feasible through the spring and into early summer. Senior military officers also say that they could maintain a war readiness in the region through May or June without rotating in fresh forces.

Military officials say they are preparing for battlefield setbacks and surprises. Forces now scheduled to flow into Iraq later, to maintain stability after a war ended, could also have their missions changed to help the combat effort.

In Germany, a weeklong computer war game simulating a war in Iraq will conclude next week. The war game is being run by Lt. Gen. William S. Wallace, commander of the Army's V Corps, and includes commanders or battle staffs from each of the divisions expected to participate in a war on Iraq.

About 100,000 American troops are now in the gulf region or nearby, a force that could grow to more than 175,000 by late February, officials said. This week, the buildup continued as Marine and Army equipment was loaded onto military cargo ships in Norfolk, Va., Beaumont and Corpus Christi, Tex., San Diego and Wilmington, N.C.