The World: Over a Barrel; Oil Prices Won't Depend on Iraq, but on Its Neighbors
By Daniel Yergin
Aug. 25, 2002

UNTIL the last two months, one of the United States' major sources of oil imports was Iraq, a country now often used in sentences with the word war. Oil prices last week reached $30 a barrel, partly because of fear of such hostilities and the rising crescendo of the national debate.

But what would war with Iraq really mean for oil prices? There is worry that hostilities would send prices sky high, delivering a powerful new shock to already-troubled American and world economies. Yet, unless war and disruption spread to other Middle Eastern countries, the impact, in oil terms, could be more limited than many anticipate.

This may seem strange. After all, Iraq is a big player in world oil and could be even bigger. Yet, in the last few years, Iraq has so marginalized itself as an exporter that the world oil market has almost grown accustomed to its unreliability. This spring, Iraq unilaterally cut off exports for a month, trying to instigate a new oil embargo. The world hardly noticed. And other exporters were grateful for the chance to fill the gap, sell more oil and make extra money.

Oil was a key consideration a decade ago when Iraq seized Kuwait and threatened the Saudi oil fields. But the focus even then was not so much on access to oil as on the ability of a Greater Iraq to transmutate oil into economic, political and military power -- especially weapons of mass destruction.

Now the debate is focused on those weapons of mass destruction and the future orientation of a Middle East in turmoil.

Iraq's marginalization is self-imposed. Its output has sagged in response to under-investment, to isolation and to its own political decisions.

At its peak in 1979, before it launched its disastrous invasion of Iran, Iraq was producing 3.5 million barrels a day. Its physical capacity to produce is now at something around 3 million barrels a day. Its actual output is a good deal lower, closer to 1.8 million barrels -- a fraction of Saudi Arabia's 8 million barrels a day.

After accounting for domestic consumption and smuggled oil, Iraq's exports are about a million barrels a day. This drop in exports reflects a struggle between Iraq and the United Nations, which oversees Iraq's exports under the Oil for Food program, because of Iraq's imposition of an illegal export surcharge that goes directly to Saddam Hussein's coffers, bypassing the United Nations accounts.

Still, the prospect of a war in the Persian Gulf has been sufficient to alarm the market. Last week's prices of $28 to $30 a barrel include a ''fear premium'' of roughly $5 to $6 -- which translates into an added 10 to 15 cents a gallon at the pump for American drivers. What this means is that some of the price spike that people anticipate with hostilities is already in the marketplace. It would be a mistake, however, to assume that it is just anxiety that is pushing prices up. Right now, market fundamentals are also somewhat tight, and traders are nervously waiting to see if the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries raises its quota when it convenes in Osaka on Sept. 18.

The onset of hostilities would almost certainly mean a cut-off of Iraqi exports, which could mean prices surging toward $35 or even $40. This is not as high as some have predicted. Still, it is significantly higher than the $18 to $25 a barrel that many regard as ''normal.'' Prices at $35 to $40 would mean an additional burden for ailing industries like airlines and for automakers, whose sales would be socked. More broadly, such prices would impose real damage across a world economy already lumbering under much strain.

Prices would only start coming down when buyers were persuaded that the global supply system was working -- that exports from other Persian Gulf countries were not disrupted, and that the rest of OPEC was making up Iraq's exports. During the gulf crisis in 1990-91, prices remained high for several months in anticipation of possible shortages once the fighting started. They plummeted the day the air war began, when it was clear that the Saudi oil fields were not vulnerable.

During the gulf crisis, the other producers had to replace five million barrels a day -- the combined exports of Iraq and Kuwait that disappeared overnight from the world market. Now, that job would be far easier. Because of Iraq's self-marginalization, there are only about a million barrels of Iraqi exports to be replaced.

Other OPEC producers have about six million barrels a day of unused production capacity that could be quickly called on to make up for the missing Iraqi barrels. Half is in Saudi Arabia, which has a policy of maintaining two to three million barrels a day of surplus capacity, with most of the rest in Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates. Saudi Arabia and Kuwait have indicated they would use that extra capacity to make up any shortfall.

There is a little extra supply capacity in Algeria, Libya and Nigeria. Venezuela and other Latin American countries are at capacity and have no extra barrels to contribute. In the next few months, Russia, which is on a strong growth track, might be able to add one to two hundred thousand barrels a day to the world market.

The real problem would be if other Persian Gulf suppliers were affected by the conflict. Then prices could climb far higher. From an oil point of view, that is the big risk. Eyes will be focused in particular on the security of production and export facilities in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. The images of Kuwait's burning oil fields, ignited by Iraq at the end of the gulf war, are still vivid.

About seven million barrels -- equal to almost 10 percent of world consumption -- pass through Saudi export facilities every day. One could well imagine the market panic that attack or damage to those facilities could cause, perhaps sending prices to $50 or even $60 a barrel for a short time. But it's no secret these fields and facilities could be a target, and they are well defended by the Saudis. In addition, American military forces are close by. There's a great deal of duplication in the facilities, which provides a backup if any anything is hit, and damaged facilities could be repaired quickly. In addition, Saudi Arabia has backup export facilities across the country, and maintains its own oil inventories outside the country.

There is also that the critical second line of defense -- the 1.2 billion barrels of strategic crude oil reserves held or controlled by the Western governments. America's Strategic Petroleum Reserve alone holds almost 600 million barrels. This would be used quickly if a larger oil disruption threatened the world economy.

One way or the other, the knowledge that replacement oil is on its way would likely stem panic buying in its tracks and send prices down -- perhaps quickly. No refiner wants to run out of oil. But neither does any refiner want the losses that come from being stuck with oil bought at $35 to $40 a barrel when prices are dropping toward $20. The slide could be further greased by the weakening in the demand for oil that could result from the price spike itself.

If there is a war, what happens when it ends? Some people talk about a flood of Iraqi oil that would pour into the market and drive prices down to single digits.

But a ''new'' Iraq is unlikely to do any flooding, even if it wanted to. The first task of a new regime would be to get production capacity, damaged by war and poor operating practices, back into gear. Fixing the immediate problems would take time and money. It would take even more time -- as well as a great deal of investment and lot of technology -- to get capacity back to where it was in 1979.

This would surely be accompanied by protracted negotiations between a new Iraqi government and the international companies -- among which Russian and French companies would be prominent, along with other European and American companies.

A new government in Baghdad would be seeking technology and large-scale investment. It would, however, hardly be a pushover in dealing with these companies; rather, it would be seeking to assure its control over -- and maximum benefit from -- its No. 1 resource and money-earner. For their part, companies would be cautious about committing large amounts of investment dollars until confident of stability -- political and contractual.

At the same time, the companies would be interested in Iraq's potential, which has loomed large since the 1920's. Oil was discovered in Iraq in 1927, in the Kurdish region, at the site of what is thought to have been the ''burning fiery furnace'' of the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar. This was a decade before the major oil discoveries in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. In 1972, four years after Saddam Hussein's Ba'this regime came to power, Iraq threw out the international companies and nationalized its industry.

Today, Iraq's official oil reserves are 112 billion, the second largest in the world, a little bigger than Kuwait's, but only about 40 percent of Saudi Arabia's, which has the largest reserves. For years, however, there has been expectation that far more oil remains to be discovered in Iraq.

This process of reconstruction and negotiation -- just getting Iraq back to where it was at its previous high of 1979 -- could take three to five years. Thus, it might not be until 2006 or 2008 that Iraq would be able to launch itself on a true expansion phase of its capacity and test the premise as to how big a player it can be in the world of oil.