THREATS AND RESPONSES; With Allies Likely and Unlikely, U.S. Navy Stems Flow of Iraqi Oil
By Michael R. Gordon
Oct. 29, 2002


The United States and its allies, with quiet help from Iran, have all but shut off the flow of illegal Iraqi oil in the Persian Gulf, playing a game of cat and mouse with small boats that had proven effective tools for smugglers and terrorists alike.

As the Bush administration prepares for a potential confrontation with Saddam Hussein, America and its naval partners have ratcheted up the pressure.

They are boarding twice as many boats as last year, and have stationed an Australian warship inside Iraq's territorial waters, all in an effort to tighten enforcement of United Nations sanctions.

''What was a blockade that was probably only 30 to 40 percent effective previously is now in the 80 to 90 percent range of effectiveness,'' said Commodore Peter Sinclair, the Australian officer who commands the allied flotilla that is charged with enforcing the embargo in the gulf.

In September, 318 ships were boarded, about double the number boarded during a similar period last year. Of those, 64 were turned back or detained.

For now, the allied embargo is also being helped by the Iranians, who once turned a blind eye to smugglers who at night often use routes that hug Iran's coastline.

It is unclear whether the Iranians, who fought a devastating war with Iraq that ended in 1990, are committed to enforcing the United Nations embargo or simply want to deprive the Americans of a reason to venture into Iran's territorial waters. But the result has been that more boats carrying suspected smugglers are being channeled toward allied patrols.

President Bush has described Iran as part of an ''axis of evil,'' but the relationship between the allied and Iranian navies has been entirely professional, allied commanders say. When the Shiloh, an American Aegis cruiser, passed by an Iranian vessel this week, sailors from the two ships stood at attention and, in a naval ritual known as an exchange of honors, saluted each other.

The sweltering waters of the Persian Gulf constitute one of the most strategically important regions in the world. The gulf is a major transit point for much of the world's oil, a former battleground between Iran and Iraq and an area where the United States has long sought to project its military power.

These days it is also filled with a new potential peril: attacks by terrorists in small motor launches or wooden boats. It is the kind of threat to which even the Shiloh -- a billion-dollar marvel that can shoot down antiship cruise missiles -- is vulnerable, even with all its sophisticated technology. Its main defense against terrorist attacks at sea are sentries who peer at the azure waters with binoculars and machine guns and small arms.

''As the Cole showed us, ships can be vulnerable to that kind of suicide attack,'' Capt. William E. Dewes, the commander of the Shiloh, said, referring to the American destroyer attacked by terrorists in Yemen in October 2000. ''We have improvised and got ourselves a pretty good system. We are using a lot of small arms that other services have.''

The threat of terrorist attacks from small craft is an added twist in the competition between an Iraqi government determined to circumvent United Nations sanctions and an American-led coalition determined to keep pressure on President Hussein.

Under a program overseen by the United Nations, Iraq is allowed to sell a limited amount of oil and use the proceeds to buy food and medicine. But Iraq has also sought to smuggle additional amounts of oil and other commodities, like dates, by sea and land.

To the consternation of Washington, which fears that oil revenue can be used by Iraq to develop nuclear, chemical or biological arms, Iraq continues to send oil illegally by pipeline to Syria and by truck to Turkey.

But the combination of Australian bravado, advanced United States military technology and indirect Iranian cooperation has enabled Washington virtually to close the tap on oil smuggled through the gulf.

It is clear that the embargo has irritated the Iraqis. The gulf waters are streaked by oil slicks from small boats that were bottled up near Iraq and dumped their cargo out of frustration. In July, the Baghdad complained to the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, accusing the Australian and American Navies of piracy for systematically boarding every ship going to and from Iraq.

The sailors have taken the accusation in stride. Some Australian sailors even have a nickname for themselves, referring to their exploits in the North Arabian Gulf. They call themselves the ''Pirates of the NAG.''

The contest between these ''pirates'' and the smugglers starts at the Iraqi town of Umm Qasr, where Iraqi oil and other cargo is loaded on ships that make their way down the Khawr Abd Allah, the main Iraqi waterway that leads to the northern Persian Gulf.

The smugglers have used a variety of tactics to sneak cargo holds of Iraqi oil and other commodities past the allied flotilla, Australian and American officers said.

When using larger vessels, the smugglers attached spikes to the hulls to puncture the small, inflatable boats that American and allied navies use to approach them. They hid oil and other cargo under piles of hay or newly laid cement floors. They welded hatches shut to prevent inspection.

After allied ships cracked down on smuggling by large, steel-hull ships, the Iraqis tried a new tactic. They flooded the gulf with dhows, wooden boats that are used by local traders and fishermen but can also hold several hundred metric tons of oil each.

But the United States and its allies have largely cut off the small boats, too. The tighter embargo has been so effective that it has even halted much of Iraq's export of dates, a valued gulf commodity that pound for pound fetches a higher price than oil.

The allied embargo is overseen by Vice Adm. Timothy Keating, who commands the Navy's Fifth Fleet. He in turn has given the Australians command of the multinational flotilla of American, British and Australian ships that is directly charged with policing the sanctions.

After the Sept. 11 terror attacks, the United States and its allies sent more ships, planes and other military forces toward the Arabian Sea, where some of them have been used to stanch the flow of illegal Iraqi oil.

''Sept. 11 led the coalition and the U.S. to put more effort into the war on terror, and that means that more ships, special forces, aircraft, military assets of all types have become available,'' Commodore Sinclair said.

The allies also began to use Kuwaiti ships to siphon off the oil from smugglers detained at sea. That dispensed with the need for allied ships to escort the detained ships to gulf ports, allowing them to patrol longer.

Finally, the Iranians lent indirect help, through coastal units of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard as well as naval vessels.

''There has been an increase in professionalism by the Iranian Navy,'' Commodore Sinclair said. ''On several occasions they have assisted by pushing smugglers out into international waters.''

With its classified displays and rows of computers, the Shiloh's command center has been a hub of the embargo effort. Teams of American and Australian officers monitor the boardings in Iraq's coastal waters.

The center takes data from airborne reconnaissance planes and its own advanced radar to create a picture of air and naval traffic through the Persian Gulf and beyond.

It can also send one of its two SH-60 Sea Hawk helicopters to the boarding sites to beam back pictures of the operation, using special sensors that create images from the heat of ships and other objects.

A recent night operation illustrated how this American, Australian and British task force works.

Several Iraqi dhows emerged from the Khawr Abd Allah only to confront the Melbourne, an Australian frigate whose shallow draft allows it to maneuver just six miles off Iraq's coast, well within Iraq's 12-mile-wide territorial waters.

''We are operating continually inside Iraq's territorial waters,'' Commodore Sinclair said. ''The smugglers know there is a big gray warship blocking the river before they even set sail.''

As the Iraqi vessels approached, small inflatable boats were rapidly lowered into the water from the Melbourne and teams of Australian sailors, guns at the ready, piled in. The boats raced to the side of the suspected smugglers so that the Australians could climb on board.

As the Australians inspected the vessels, Lt. Cmdr. William Chase and Lt. Gabriel Kelly flew the United States Sea Hawk helicopter that hovered overhead. The pictures transmitted to the command staff on the Shiloh enabled it to monitor the operation as it unfolded. The helicopter also provided cover for the boardings with a .50-caliber machine gun.

On this run, the allied teams found that the dhows indeed contained illegal oil and dates, and the boats were forced to turn back.

But that is just the first zone of the allies' defense. To the south is an area that allied sailors call the ''car park.'' Situated about 12 miles from the Iraqi coast, it is a place where vessels wait for Iraqi harbor masters to guide them into the Khawr Abd Allah, a waterway allied sailors refer to simply as the ''K.A.A.'' American and Australian sailors inspect the car park daily, taking down the names and positions of the ships to create a data base of shipping in and out of Iraq.

Still farther south is a region the Americans have named Comiskey after the Chicago baseball park. Here, sailors also board gulf vessels going to and from Iraq, including some of the larger ships that the Melbourne assumes are probably carrying legitimate cargo and are allowed to pass.

Some of the inspections can take hours, as sailors rappel down the sides of huge containers and peer into metal tanks. The goal is not just to stop illicit exports but also to ensure that no military supplies or illegal cargo are brought in.