STATE OF THE UNION: THE OVERVIEW; CALLING IRAQ A SERIOUS THREAT, BUSH VOWS THAT HE'LL DISARM IT, AND ALSO REBUILD U.S. ECONOMY
By Richard W. Stevenson and David E. Sanger
Jan. 29, 2003

In an assertive speech that covered the main themes of his administration, President Bush tonight combined an unflinching threat of military action against Saddam Hussein with sweeping proposals on the key domestic issues of health care and tax relief.

Mr. Bush, delivering his second State of the Union message before Congress, sought to assure Americans that he could deal with their economic troubles and foreign crises simultaneously and with compassion and resolve.

He spoke forcefully, purposefully and in somber tones of an America unafraid to take unilateral action, if necessary, against an Iraqi leader he portrayed as the personification of evil.

''Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an option,'' Mr. Bush said. 

He defended his doctrine of pre-emption as the necessary response to terrorism and sought to increase the pressure on his hesitant allies by announcing that he was sending Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to the United Nations on Feb. 5.

Moving to control the next part of the decision-making calendar, Mr. Bush said Mr. Powell would ''present information and intelligence'' to buttress White House contentions that Mr. Hussein had deceived United Nations inspectors and that he had secret links to Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups.

But the president tempered that message with a new agenda of international humanitarianism, built on a major new intitiative against AIDS in Africa.

He promised his American audience tax relief for ordinary families and for investors in the stock market.

Addressing his determination to deal once and for all with Mr. Hussein, the president made it clear that while he would seek the world's support in confronting Iraq -- and in liberating it -- he would not wait. ''We will consult, but let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein does not fully disarm, for the safety of our people, and for the peace of the world, we will lead a coalition to disarm him,'' Mr. Bush said.

In an effort to answer his critics around the world, Mr. Bush described America as a benign superpower, one that planned to ''bring to the Iraqi people food, and medicines and supplies.'' He paused for emphasis, and added: ''And freedom.''

''We exercise power without conquest,'' he said, ''and sacrifice for the liberty of strangers.''

He described Mr. Hussein as showing ''utter contempt'' for the United Nations, and he sent a message to the armed forces he has dispatched to the Persian Gulf, telling them that ''crucial hours'' lie ahead.

''In those hours, the success of our cause will depend on you,'' Mr. Bush said, sounding as if he assumed military conflict was coming. ''Your training has prepared you. Your honor will guide you. You believe in America and America believes in you.''

Mr. Bush used the speech to lay out his rationale for taking pre-emptive action against Iraq, saying that Mr. Hussein had used chemical weapons on his own people and had routinely resorted to torture against his opponents.

''If this is not evil, then evil has no meaning,'' he said.

In calm and measured tones that sometimes dropped almost to a whisper, Mr. Bush pivoted from the weak economy, tax cuts, health care and volunteerism to AIDS, terrorism and the likelihood of war. He linked the troubles at home to the threats from abroad by suggesting that they collectively posed a challenge that could not be deferred.

''We will not deny, we will not ignore, we will not pass along our problems to other Congresses, other presidents and other generations,'' the president said. ''We will confront them with focus, and clarity, and courage.''

Without providing any details, the president cited evidence ''from intelligence sources, secret communications and statements by people now in custody'' in asserting that Mr. Hussein is currently tied to Al Qaeda.

And he described what Sept. 11, 2001, might have been like if the hijackers that day had had access to chemical and biological weapons of the sort that the United States says Mr. Hussein has stockpiled.

''It would take just one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known,'' Mr. Bush said. ''We will do everything in our power to make sure that day never comes.''

The White House had signaled for days that this would not be Mr. Bush's final word on Iraq, and the president stopped short of declaring war. But he left little doubt that he intended to disarm Mr. Hussein by force, with whatever allies he could assemble, if the Iraqi leader did not give up his weapons voluntarily.

Mr. Bush left open the possibility that Mr. Hussein could avoid war by immediately complying with the demands by the United Nations that he disarm, but seemed to hold out little hope that the Iraqi leader would do so.

''The dictator of Iraq is not disarming,'' Mr. Bush said. ''To the contrary, he is deceiving.''

Mr. Bush also stressed efforts he was taking to protect the nation from another terrorist attack, announcing that the Central Intelligence Agency and the F.B.I. would pool foreign and domestic intelligence through a new joint operation intended to improve their cooperation and better identify threats.

In devoting the first third of his address to the economy and domestic issues, he displayed a determination not to be seen as overly absorbed by those crises or inattentive to domestic problems. It was that image that hobbled his father's unsuccessful re-election campaign 11 years ago.

His address had a number of surprises, among them a call for a $15 billion program -- including $10 billion in new money -- to fight AIDS in Africa and the Caribbean.

The initiative fit into two major themes of Mr. Bush's administration: its efforts to be seen as ''compassionate'' in its conservatism and its efforts to show the rest of the world that its foreign policy goal is not hegemony but to foster peace, stability and prosperity.

Mr. Bush said his ''first goal'' was to revive the economy, which after showing signs of recovery last year appears to be stalling again. He said the best way to do this was passage of his $670 billion tax cut plan, including its provision to end taxation of most stock dividends.

He also promised to dedicate $400 billion over the next decade to overhauling the Medicare system and adding to it prescription drug coverage for some retirees.

And after two years of attacks by environmentalists for his deregulatory policies, Mr. Bush called for $1.2 billion in research into cleaner-burning hydrogen-powered automobiles.

He proposed a $450 million plan to provide mentors for children whose parents are in prison and a $600 million program to help an additional 300,000 people get treatment for substance abuse.

He said his budget plan for next year, which he will submit to Congress on Monday, would ask for $6 billion for a new program to produce more and better vaccines and treatments against bioterrorism from agents like anthrax, botulinum toxin, Ebola and plague.

Addressing an issue that ranks high among the concerns of social conservatives, Mr. Bush pledged to push for a ban on the procedure that its opponents call partial-birth abortion.

But Mr. Bush's task tonight was to mobilize the American public and the nation's allies to the cause of disarming Iraq and trusting America's motives. The president asserted that there was little distinction between fighting terrorism and confronting ''outlaw regimes'' that stockpile or seek to develop chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.

''These regimes could use such weapons for blackmail, terror and mass murder,'' he said. ''They could also give or sell those weapons to their terrorist allies, who would use them without the least hesitation.''

Mr. Bush's mission tonight was to add urgency to the confrontation with Iraq, and he did so by alleging -- in what White House officials noted was the present tense -- that ''Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaeda.'' But when asked today for the evidence to back up his assertion, a senior administration official said simply ''we'll deal with Al Qaeda and Iraq in the next few days.''

The heart of Mr. Bush's argument, however, is that America and the world cannot afford to wait until it is clear that Iraq will attack America, or its allies.

''Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent,'' he said, a clear reference to European nations that argue that Mr. Hussein is contained. ''Since when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting us on notice before they strike?''

Mr. Bush offered little new evidence about Iraq's actions today, but he described Mr. Hussein's methods of torture and intimidation in stark terms, and at one point he clearly compared the Iraqi leader to Hitler.

He talked of forced confessions, extracted ''by torturing children while their parents are made to watch.'' He detailed electric shocks, dripping acid, and mutilation with electric drills -- not the usual discourse for State of the Union addresses.

The core of his argument, however, rested on the questions that Hans Blix, the co-leader of the United Nations inspection team, said on Monday were still unanswered. He spoke of 25,000 liters of anthrax -- ''enough doses to kill several million people'' -- that remains unaccounted for. He asked for evidence that 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin, which causes respiratory failure, has been destroyed.

In dwelling for so long on Mr. Hussein's abuses, he quite deliberately isolated Iraq from the other two nations that make up what, in last year's address 364 nights ago, he memorably called an ''Axis of Evil.''

There was no such turn of phrase tonight. Instead, he argued that ''different threats require different strategies.'' Iran, he said, continued to repress freedom and seek weapons of mass destruction, but he argued that Iranians themselves were the greatest hope for change. They are, he said, ''risking intimidation and dealth as they speak out for liberty, human rights and democracy.''