THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.S. MAY ABANDON U.N. VOTE ON IRAQ, POWELL TESTIFIES
By David E. Sanger With Warren Hoge
March 14, 2003

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said today that the United States might choose to abandon a second United Nations resolution authorizing military action against Iraq, only a week after President Bush vowed to force countries to take sides on the issue.

Mr. Powell's comment, taken together with a White House announcement that if a Security Council vote does occur, it will not happen until sometime next week, appeared to be evidence that the White House is losing hope of winning a majority vote on the resolution and may proceed to war without one.

Until today, President Bush had insisted the issue had to be resolved this week and that avoiding a vote was not an option. ''No matter what the whip count is, we're calling for the vote,'' he said last week.

Mr. Powell's statement before Congress came after several days of internal administration dispute as Mr. Powell argued that it would be politically less damaging to go to war without a United Nations vote than to proceed under the shadow of an explicit rejection of military force.
The White House made no effort to distance itself from Mr. Powell's comment, and preparations for war sped forward. The Air Force dispatched one of the last major components of its plan for a huge air war: four B-2 stealth bombers, which will be based on Diego Garcia, in the Indian Ocean.

Turkey today dismissed the most recent of three appeals, this time from Mr. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney, to use its territory as a base for strikes against Iraq, senior administration officials said.

Mr. Cheney spoke today with Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the leader of the governing political party in Turkey, and an official familiar with the conversation said that ''the message was clear that by the time Turkey got its act together, it would be too late to do us any good.''

The White House pessimism over the Security Council votes was voiced more directly today by Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who was quoted by the leader of the conservative opposition, Iain Duncan Smith, as saying that a diplomatic solution was ''probably less likely than at any time'' and prospects of military action ''more likely.''

The resolution has been considered crucial for Mr. Blair if he is to have any hope of gaining political support in his own party for a British role in a war against Iraq.

In a measure of how divided the Security Council remains, Russia's ambassador to the United Nations, Sergey Lavrov, said tonight as he emerged from a lengthy closed-door meeting, that the United States, Britain and Spain had ''decided not to ask for any vote any day soon.''

White House officials insisted that Mr. Bush was still making calls in hopes of winning the votes of three African nations -- Angola, Guinea and Cameroon -- along with Mexico, Chile and Pakistan. But the support of the three African countries was described today as weak. That left Mexico and Chile refusing to commit themselves. Tonight, however, Chile's foreign minister said her country could not support the resolution unless changes were made in it.

The subtle political effect of Mr. Powell's comments by the end of day was clear: the six countries are unlikely to take the domestic political risk of publicly backing the United States if they believe that Washington will abandon the vote altogether.

Mr. Powell never referred to President Bush's commitment to a vote, but rather made it sound as if that was just one option.

''We are still talking to the members of the Council with respect to coalescing around a position that wouldn't draw a veto, but the options remain: go for a vote and see what members say, or not go for a vote,'' Mr. Powell told the House Appropriations Subcommittee.

In private, Mr. Powell has voiced concern that going against the Security Council's expressed position would lead to accusations that the United States was violating the United Nations Charter, which it helped write more than a half century ago. More hawkish members of the administration -- including Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld and Mr. Cheney -- also decided that the vote was not worth it, officials said, chiefly because it could slow their military plans and because Security Council inaction would help prove their point that the institution is losing its relevance.

By this afternoon, the White House was already citing other legal justifications for invading Iraq without explicit United Nations approval, saying that Iraq's accumulation of weapons of mass destruction was a violation of the cease-fire that ended the 1991 Persian Gulf war -- and that military action would, in essence, simply be a resumption of that conflict.

Meanwhile, both American and British officials blamed France for bringing the world closer to war, most notably by its immediate rejection of Britain's proposal for Saddam Hussein to meet, in short order, six specific benchmarks to demonstrate that Iraq is truly disarming.

Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, told reporters this morning that ''France rejected the British proposal before the Iraqis did.''

Picking up the same themes, a British spokesman accused the French of ''poisoning'' the diplomatic process by dismissing a compromise proposal by Britain, and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said he found it ''extraordinary'' that France had closed off all circumstances under which it might support a new United Nations measure.

The chorus of comments were a switch in strategy by Britain from expressing the hope of securing a majority of the 15 Security Council members to blaming the French for the expected rejection of the resolution and possibly forcing Britain and the United States into abandoning the vote entirely.

In a reminder of why the French and British are often called ''the best of enemies,'' France's foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, today issued a statement that accused the British and the Americans of seeking to delay war by a few days, rather than avoid it.

In the statement he said that ''it isn't a matter of according a few more days to Iraq before resorting to force, but to resolutely advance on the path of peaceful disarmament created by the inspections, which are a credible alternative to war.''

The British said they would still work ''flat out'' over the weekend and into early next week to obtain Security Council backing, but a spokesman for Mr. Blair acknowledged that they were approaching a ''diplomatic endgame.''

In a White House that prides itself on orderliness, there were signs today that the pressure of pulling together enough votes to give legitimacy to a military attack was beginning to fray schedules and plans.

President Bush was scheduled to go to a lunch on Capitol Hill, but with his motorcade warming up on the South Lawn, he canceled the appearance at the last moment, to talk to Mr. Blair and continue his other calls.

This morning there was a brief scurry by White House officials to arrange an overseas trip for Mr. Bush, a war caucus with Mr. Blair and perhaps Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain.

But there was concern on both sides of the Atlantic that any such meeting would only worsen Mr. Blair's current political troubles. The scramble to make arrangements was ended as abruptly as the president's lunch.

''There's a recognition this has not been our finest diplomatic hour,'' said one senior official, his voice dripping with understatement. ''I think minds are turning to the next step,'' meaning military action.

At the United Nations, the Security Council met all afternoon amid signs that the six uncommitted nations had agreed to vote as a bloc. It was unclear whether they would submit any counterproposals, but the group met to coordinate their approach at midday today.

''At the moment there is no clear way out,'' said Munir Akram, Pakistan's United Nations ambassador, when asked about the progress of the Council's debates. 'We are trying to search for common ground.''

As that meeting broke up, a procession of Security Council envoys went up to the 38th floor, one at a time, to meet with Secretary General Kofi Annan who has been exhorting the Council to come together.

Mr. Annan, who returned from a trip to the Netherlands this morning, said: ''I know that strenuous efforts are being made by Council members to compromise and break the deadlock. I think these efforts should be taken seriously and I would urge all Council members to cooperate and to work in search of that compromise.''

United Nations officials said this evening that they expected the Council to resume deliberations on Friday afternoon, and to work through the weekend, formally or informally.

Hans Blix, the chief inspector for chemical and biological weapons, took part in the Council's consultations. On Wednesday night, Mr. Blix sent his international board of advisers a draft of what he considers the ''key remaining disarmament tasks,'' a list of about a dozen specifics culled from the 173-page list released about a week ago.

Mr. Blix is scheduled to present that document to Council diplomats next week.

Mr. Annan said today that the tests that Britain put into its proposal ''are apparently already in the document Mr. Blix will be giving to the Council next week regarding remaining disarmament issues.''

Gunter Pleuger, Germany's United Nations ambassador, said that a majority of the Council wanted a ''peaceful disarmament of Iraq.''

He added that the Council was awaiting the presentation by Mr. Blix that is to outline 12 key remaining disarmament issues confronting Iraq. He said those points would be used to determine disarmament benchmarks, not the list put forward by Britain.
Correction: March 18, 2003
A picture caption on Friday about United Nations debate on Iraq reversed the identifications of two men shown talking after discussions at the Security Council. The American ambassador, John D. Negroponte, was on the right as he spoke with the French ambassador, Jean-Marc de la Sablière.