PRESIDENT NOTES DISSENT ON IRAQ, VOWING TO LISTEN
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Aug. 17, 2002



President Bush said today that he was listening carefully to a group of Republicans who were warning him against going to war with Iraq, but that he would still make up his own mind based on information that is very tightly held within his administration.

It was the first time Mr. Bush had so directly addressed the growing chorus of concern from Republicans, which now includes former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and Brent Scowcroft, the first President Bush's national security adviser and a close Bush family friend.

''I am aware that some very intelligent people are expressing their opinions about Saddam Hussein and Iraq,'' Mr. Bush told reporters outside a community center here, near his 1,600-acre Texas ranch. ''I listen very carefully to what they have to say.''

Mr. Bush added: ''I'll continue to consult. Listen, it's a healthy debate for people to express their opinion. People should be allowed to express their opinion. But America needs to know, I'll be making up my mind based upon the latest intelligence and how best to protect our own country plus our friends and allies.''

In Germany today, officials said that the United States had responded to statements by Chancellor Gerhard Schröder that Germany was not prepared to have any role in a war in Iraq by sending Ambassador Daniel R. Coats to express to the German government the administration's displeasure.

Mr. Schröder said when he opened his election campaign earlier this month that Germany would not take any role in or help pay for ''an adventure'' in Iraq. While his comments reflected the concerns expressed by other European leaders about the Bush administration's position, Mr. Schröder's comments were more openly critical of the Bush administration. [Page A4.]

The swiftness with which Mr. Bush responded to Mr. Scowcroft's warnings, which were published Thursday in an opinion article in The Wall Street Journal, reflected how seriously he was taking the concerns of foreign policy experts and senior members of his own party. Mr. Scowcroft wrote in the article that an attack on Iraq at this time would jeopardize the global counterterrorist campaign. Mr. Bush appeared to be intervening in the discussion to minimize any perception of disarray within his administration that could limit his options or complicate his ability to galvanize support for his course in Iraq.

The president's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, a protégée of Mr. Scowcroft in the first Bush White House, was heading to the Bush ranch here today for meetings with Mr. Bush.

Although Mr. Scowcroft's warning was likely to be a topic of Ms. Rice's conversations with the president, administration officials said that she was arriving today to relieve her deputy, Stephen J. Hadley, and to begin her scheduled duty at the ranch during the president's monthlong stay. A senior member of Mr. Bush's national security team always remains with him in Crawford.

On Thursday, Ms. Rice said in an interview broadcast by the BBC that there was a very powerful moral case for ousting President Hussein, and that if he were left in power his threat would emerge in a very big way that the United States could not dismiss. ''We certainly do not have the luxury of doing nothing,'' she said.

An administration official said that Ms. Rice's comments, made for an interview about the Sept. 11 attacks, were not part of a plan to persuade the public to support a war with Iraq. But they represent one of the strongest public warnings from the White House on what it considers the threat Mr. Hussein may pose.

Mr. Scowcroft's public comments, first made in a television interview nearly two weeks ago and then amplified in the Journal article, came as no surprise to top officials in the administration, who have been well aware of his concerns.

But his words landed with particular force because he maintains a close relationship with Mr. Bush's father. A Republican with close ties to the Bush inner circle said today that Mr. Scowcroft would not have made his warnings so public without knowledge from the first President Bush.

''This is a clear, direct signal,'' the Republican said.

White House advisers and administration officials who disagree with Mr. Scowcroft shrugged off his concerns, though, saying that they were part of the ongoing debate about Iraq.

''I haven't noticed people pulling their hair out,'' said a senior administration official who also served in the first Bush administration. ''Scowcroft didn't want to overthrow Saddam Hussein in the first Persian Gulf war. He felt from the beginning that a successor might be worse. His position just reflects the same view he had back then.''

Nonetheless, the official said, Mr. Scowcroft's views clearly represented the views of the president's father. ''I think the first President Bush is telling his son, 'Be prudent, George,' '' the official said. ''We are being prudent.''

The official also said that there was increasing evidence that Iraq possessed or had sought to build chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, although there was still much the administration did not know. ''But this is just not something that reasonable people would disagree about,'' the official said.

The official said that the president's current thinking on Iraq was to ''resist being put in a box, including by those who are pushing regime change,'' or the overthrow of Mr. Hussein. But Mr. Bush was still moving toward favoring an overthrow within a wide range of options, the official said.

It was unclear from Mr. Bush's remarks today whether he would share with the public the intelligence findings that he said would guide his final decision on Iraq. So far there has been no promise from the White House similar to one made by Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who said in July that Britain had gathered extensive evidence that Mr. Hussein was still trying to develop weapons of mass destruction. Mr. Blair said that Britain would publish the evidence ''at the appropriate time.' ''

Republicans concerned about what they see as Mr. Bush's precipitous course toward war with Iraq, like Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, say that the Central Intelligence Agency has no evidence that Iraq possesses or will soon possess nuclear weapons.

Today the senior administration official would only say, regarding the intelligence information, that ''before something dramatic happens there will be disclosure of as much as we can say publicly.''

At the State Department, where many senior officials oppose what they see as a rush by administration hawks to use military force in Iraq, Mr. Scowcroft's comments were welcomed. A senior official there said that after Mr. Scowcroft made his earlier comments on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell had called Mr. Scowcroft to thank him. Another State Department official said that some senior department officials were particularly grateful for Mr. Scowcroft's warning because it might be given more weight than similar words from the State Department, which has already been tagged as too dovish by some in Mr. Bush's inner circle.

''These are the kinds of guys you want to have making these arguments,'' the official said.

Wesley K. Clark, a retired general who led the NATO alliance during the Kosovo war, added his voice to the debate today. He warned in an article in the September issue of The Washington Monthly that America's success in Afghanistan had emboldened it to act rashly, without consultation with its allies.

''The early successes seem to have reinforced the conviction of some within the U.S. government that the continuing war against terrorism is best waged outside the structures of international institutions -- that American leadership must be 'unfettered,' '' wrote General Clark, who feuded with former President Clinton and made a reputation in his military career as a contrarian.

''This is a fundamental misjudgment. The longer this war goes on -- and by all accounts, it will go on for years -- the more our success will depend on the willing cooperation and active participation of our allies to root out terrorist cells in Europe and Asia, to cut off funding and support of terrorists and to deal with Saddam Hussein and other threats.''

Editors' Note: September 4, 2002, Wednesday A front-page article on Aug. 16 and one on Aug. 17 reported on divisions among Republicans over President Bush's high-profile planning for a possible war with Iraq. The articles cited comments by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and by Brent Scowcroft, the first President Bush's national security adviser, among others. The Aug. 16 article described Mr. Kissinger's expressed concerns about the need for building an international coalition before waging war and his doubts about the Bush administration's plan to make ''regime change'' the center pole of its policy. But it should have made a clearer distinction between his views and those of Mr. Scowcroft and other Republicans with more categorical objections to a military attack. The second article listed Mr. Kissinger incorrectly among Republicans who were warning outright against a war. Editors' Note: September 4, 2002, Wednesday A front-page article on Aug. 16 and one on Aug. 17 reported on divisions among Republicans over President Bush's high-profile planning for a possible war with Iraq. The articles cited comments by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and by Brent Scowcroft, the first President Bush's national security adviser, among others. The Aug. 16 article described Mr. Kissinger's expressed concerns about the need for building an international coalition before waging war and his doubts about the Bush administration's plan to make ''regime change'' the center pole of its policy. But it should have made a clearer distinction between his views and those of Mr. Scowcroft and other Republicans with more categorical objections to a military attack. The second article listed Mr. Kissinger incorrectly among Republicans who were warning outright against a war.
Editors’ Note: Sept. 4, 2002
A front-page article on Aug. 16 and one on Aug. 17 reported on divisions among Republicans over President Bush's high-profile planning for a possible war with Iraq. The articles cited comments by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and by Brent Scowcroft, the first President Bush's national security adviser, among others.

The Aug. 16 article described Mr. Kissinger's expressed concerns about the need for building an international coalition before waging war and his doubts about the Bush administration's plan to make ''regime change'' the center pole of its policy. But it should have made a clearer distinction between his views and those of Mr. Scowcroft and other Republicans with more categorical objections to a military attack. The second article listed Mr. Kissinger incorrectly among Republicans who were warning outright against a war.

Editors’ Note: Sept. 4, 2002
A front-page article on Aug. 16 and one on Aug. 17 reported on divisions among Republicans over President Bush's high-profile planning for a possible war with Iraq. The articles cited comments by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger and by Brent Scowcroft, the first President Bush's national security adviser, among others.

The Aug. 16 article described Mr. Kissinger's expressed concerns about the need for building an international coalition before waging war and his doubts about the Bush administration's plan to make ''regime change'' the center pole of its policy. But it should have made a clearer distinction between his views and those of Mr. Scowcroft and other Republicans with more categorical objections to a military attack. The second article listed Mr. Kissinger incorrectly among Republicans who were warning outright against a war.