VIGILANCE AND MEMORY: THE PRESIDENT; Bush to Warn U.N.: Act on Iraq or U.S. Will; He Leads Nation in Mourning at Terror Sites
By David E. Sanger and Julia Preston
Sept. 12, 2002


President Bush plans to challenge the United Nations today to enforce resolutions it has passed since 1991 requiring Iraq to ''unconditionally accept'' the destruction of its chemical and biological weapons and nuclear research facilities, according to administration officials. He will warn that if the United Nations fails to act, the United States will step in to force Iraqi compliance.

Putting muscle behind Mr. Bush's warning, the Pentagon announced that it was preparing to send 600 military staff members from its Central Command headquarters in Florida -- which has responsibility for the Middle East -- to the gulf state of Qatar in November. While the move will be characterized as a temporary exercise, it could well become permanent and will put a vanguard of American commanders, the core of a battle staff, on Saddam Hussein's doorstep. [Page B23.]

Secretary General Kofi Annan of the United Nations will strike a markedly different tone from that of Mr. Bush, arguing in a pointed speech just before the president's that the United States must act through the United Nations to confront Iraq.

Mr. Annan's office took the unusual step of releasing his remarks last night to underscore his caution that there is ''no substitute for the unique legitimacy provided by the United Nations.'' 

The fast-developing confrontation over Iraq hung over a a somber but restorative day of national mourning and commemoration.

Moving between the three sites of last year's terrorist attacks, Mr. Bush consoled survivors in Washington, fought back tears at the Pennsylvania crash site of United Flight 93, and spent two hours in the pit that was once the foundation of the World Trade Center, hugging the families of some of the thousands who died.

Tonight, emotionally drained from the somberness of the day, Mr. Bush spoke to the nation from Ellis Island, saying he had ''no intention of ignoring or appeasing history's latest gang of fanatics.''

''In the ruins of two towers, under a flag unfurled at the Pentagon, at the funerals of the lost, we have made a sacred promise to ourselves and to the world: We will not relent until justice is done, and our nation is secure. What our enemies have begun, we will finish,'' he said.

But his United Nations speech this morning is expected to move beyond commemoration to the next phase of his battle against terrorism -- a phase in which he plans to turn his attention to what he is expected to term a ''decade of defiance.''

Heeding the call of allies that he must operate through the United Nations, aides familiar with the speech said Mr. Bush planned to put the onus on Mr. Hussein and the United Nations itself -- and to portray the United States as a reluctant sheriff that will step in only as a last resort.

One senior administration official who has been giving advance warning of the message to governments around the world said Mr. Bush ''won't set any deadlines,'' nor will he propose a specific course of action. But just as the president told Congress last Sept. 20 that he was not willing to wait very long for the Taliban to turn over Osama bin Laden, the official said, ''he's not willing to wait very long for Saddam to allow the destruction of his weapons.''

Mr. Bush has been drafting and re-drafting the speech for weeks, searching for a balance between American support for the authority of the United Nations and an American warning that the organization's legitimacy is at stake.

According to officials who have reviewed the drafts or summarized them for foreign leaders, Mr. Bush will make it clear that he does not plan to allow the United Nations much time to enforce 16 resolutions that have been allowed to lapse.

''The message is pretty simple,'' the senior official said. ''The U.N. is at a crossroads. We have plenty of resolutions about Iraq. Now we have to choose whether the U.N. exists to pass resolutions or make them stick.''

Privately, administration officials are talking about starting up inspections in three to four weeks, after the president of France, Jacques Chirac, mentioned a three-week timetable in an interview with The New York Times.

Richard L. Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, told a conference in Washington on Tuesday that Mr. Chirac's statements had been ''noted'' in the State Department because they indicated that European leaders were coalescing around the thought that Mr. Hussein's actions could no longer be tolerated.
Mr. Bush does not plan to talk about restarting inspections; his references in the speech focus on inspections Mr. Hussein has blocked, and on the forced withdrawal of United Nations inspectors three and a half years ago. But he leaves the door open to a final inspection effort -- as long as it is intended to lead to the immediate dismantlement of all weapons of mass destruction.

His message, one aide said, will be that ''the only thing he won't abide is inaction.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell previewed the speech today in meetings at the United Nations with the foreign ministers of Russia, China and Britain. He also met Joschka Fischer, the foreign minister of Germany, the ally most outspoken in opposing expanding the war to Iraq.

According to the text of his remarks, Mr. Annan, using carefully general terms, shares the misgivings of the Germans and others about the United States' acting on its own on Iraq.

Even for a major power, ''choosing to follow or reject the multilateral path must not be a simple matter of political convenience,'' he says.

He adds that ''when states decide to use force to deal with broader threats to international peace and security, there is no substitute for the unique legitimacy provided by the United Nations.'' The ''primary criterion for putting an issue on the Council's agenda'' should be ''the existence of a grave threat to world peace,'' he says.

At one point Mr. Annan presents the issue in personal terms.

''I stand before you today as a multilateralist,'' he says early in his comments, ''by precedent, by principle, by charter and by duty.''

While the White House has kept tight control over Mr. Bush's speech -- which was written partly by Karen Hughes, his former counselor, who was seen traveling with him today -- the United Nations departed from custom in releasing the advance text.
Mr. Annan's aides said they feared that his comments would be lost as the focus turned today to Mr. Bush's efforts to rally support for a campaign against the Iraqi leader.

While implicitly cautioning the United States, Mr. Annan will also chastise Baghdad for defying United Nations resolutions. He will warn that if its violations continue, the Security Council will have to act to enforce them.

''The leadership of Iraq continues to defy'' mandatory Security Council resolutions, Mr. Annan will say. He urges Iraq to comply and appeals to other nations to pressure Baghdad to accept the return of the weapons inspectors, calling this ''an indispensable first step towards assuring the world that all Iraq's weapons of mass destruction have been eliminated.''

His aides say he regards the address as one of the most important he will make as secretary general. He will open the session and President Bush will follow 15 minutes later. Then 22 other government leaders are scheduled to address the General Assembly on the first day of its annual fall debate.

United Nations officials acknowledged that it was unusual for a secretary general to address himself in such clear counterpoint to a speech from an American president here. Mr. Annan's aides sent a copy of the text to President Bush today.

The secretary general's comments echo keenly felt frustrations at the United Nations that the Bush administration has gone its own way on global issues ranging from climate change to the international war crimes court.

But he warns, ''If Iraq's defiance continues, the Security Council must face its responsibilities.''
United Nations officials said Mr. Annan felt confident that his relations with Washington were warm enough that President Bush would not object to his speech. The president called Mr. Annan earlier this week to discuss Iraq, officials said.

However, Mr. Annan strongly hopes to avoid American-led military action against Iraq, which he fears could destabilize the Middle East, United Nations officials said.

In London, Prime Minister Tony Blair bowed to critics in his Labor Party and agreed to recall Parliament from its summer recess to debate his hard-line stance on Iraq. Parliament is not due back in session till Oct. 15, but Mr. Blair said today that he would schedule a special one-day debate during the week of Sept. 23. He did not, however, accede to his critics' request that there be a binding vote on the issue.

Mr. Blair's spokesman said Downing Street would have made public a long-promised dossier on Iraqi arms buildup by then. The release of the document has been delayed while the British government works out how to produce convincing evidence of the threat from Iraq without compromising sources.

Mr. Blair has been Mr. Bush's staunchest supporter in the campaign against Saddam Hussein. However, opinion surveys in Britain show that he faces opposition from majorities of the public at large, the trade union movement and the Labor members of Parliament.

On Tuesday, Mr. Blair faced down his critics at the Trades Union Congress in Blackpool, pledging that no military action would be taken without United Nations consideration and full debate in Parliament.

But, sticking to his tough line, he said, ''Let it be clear there can be no more conditions, no more games, no more prevaricating, no more undermining of the U.N.'s authority.'' And he warned, ''Let it be clear that should the will of United Nations be ignored, action will follow.''