The Nation: Torture for Everyone; In Iraq, Fear and Mumbling at the Top
By John F. Burns
Dec. 22, 2002


IT was early last week when word reached the Al Rashid Hotel, where foreign visitors are lodged and closely watched by Saddam Hussein's government. The Iraqi currency, the dinar, had gone into free fall, losing 25 percent of its value against the dollar.

Rumors in the bazaars immediately assumed some dramatic event involving President Bush or President Saddam Hussein, both of whose choices now dictate whether Iraq will go to war for the third time.

Had the American leader made some move to bring war closer? Had some conspirator broken through the multiple layers of defenses, including Saddam look-alikes deployed as doubles, and assassinated the Iraqi leader?

By nightfall, the dinar stabilized (though well below its earlier value), and money traders settled on a less dramatic explanation, but one that set off a new round of whispering: somebody high in the government had dumped dinars on the market to buy tens of millions of dollars in a few hours.

This, in turn, raised the question of what need anybody in power might have had for so many dollars -- if not to defect, then perhaps to send family members abroad, before American missiles or a coup in Baghdad sent the whole grim edifice of power crumbling.

Something similar happened in 1995, when Mr. Hussein's son-in-law, Gen. Hussein Kamel, defected to Jordan with what was said to have been $25 million in cash.

General Kamel betrayed the secrets of Iraq's weapons programs to the Central Intelligence Agency before committing an act of stupefying rashness or blind illusion. He accepted his father-in-law's promises of forgiveness if he came home to resume his role as father of Mr. Hussein's grandchildren. Within 72 hours, the general was dead, as were his father and numerous clansmen, victims of a death squad sent their villa in Baghdad.

For an Iraqi even to speculate that such an episode might have been unfolding again was to run the risk of arrest, torture and execution. So an outsider could gain little from probing for a definitive cause of the dinar's plunge.

Still, the episode reflected something inescapable here in recent weeks -- the febrile tension that has settled over every corner of the government as the crisis over Mr. Hussein's secret weapons, or lack of them, deepens.

Long before any destroyer in the Persian Gulf has fired the first cruise missile, President Bush, by playing Gary Cooper in ''High Noon'' to Mr. Hussein's desperado, has already effected striking changes in the dynamic of power in Iraq.

The paralysis that has gripped many Iraqis has shown signs of moving upward into the mirrored chambers of Mr. Hussein's palaces. The signs have been far too fleeting to gain any sure sense of what is going on. Mostly, too, they go unreported by Western news gatherers, concerned not to needlessly put at risk their chances of winning new visas by reporting on matters they have no hope of confirming by their usual standards of responsible reporting.

Still, enough signs suggest that the United States, in weighing the options for disarming Mr. Hussein, is confronted with a wild card that would unsettle any gambler's game: a startling lack of coherence in the way power is dispensed in this rigid monolith of a state.

To go further, and to say that power in Iraq is unraveling, would be to reach too far, since nothing yet remotely resembles a challenge to Mr. Hussein. But for a reporter who was in Baghdad exactly 12 years ago, on the eve of the gulf war, the contrasts are unavoidable, beginning with the Iraqi leader's stubborn but at least comprehensible pronouncements then, and his perplexing performances now.

In his speeches in the 1970's and 80's, when he was consolidating power and even during the chaos of the Iran-Iraq war, Mr. Hussein, while never an orator, gave a sense of determined purpose. Many Iraqis and successive American administrations were prepared to tolerate his brutalities and focus on the extraordinary improvement in Iraq's economy and in education, health care -- and in the scientific infrastructure that was to underpin his ambitious weapons programs.

But recently he has given the impression of a man no longer sure of where he is headed. To a number of Iraqis, as well as to outsiders trying to chart his course, he has seemed almost befuddled, shifting back and forth, sometimes in the same sentence, between a seeming willingness to compromise to save himself, and the old instinct to strike out. In part, this may reflect his narrowing choices, as Mr. Bush presses forward with his ultimatum that Iraq finally abandon the imperial ambitions that his secret weapons represent, or face being toppled.

But even that cannot completely explain the convolutions in the Iraqi leader's speeches. Rarely has the difficulty been more apparent than in the baffling passages that constituted much of what he had to say early this month when he mused aloud in a gathering filmed for television on his decision to admit United Nations weapons inspectors he once called spies.

To Iraq's top leaders, he first cited the Iraqi people's historical capacity for ''patience.'' And then this, from the official English transcript (which the faithful minders assigned to news reporters by the government admitted had lost nothing in clarity in translation):

''Thus we are entering a new field: plain evil, and plain cowardice, by the parties who are supposed to present an opinion and make a stand, not in defense of Iraq, because Iraq doesn't need any party to defend it, as it relies on God Almighty, and whoever relies on God, who is the all-powerful, unmatched by any other power, will not, as I believe, diminish his faith or his ability, to the point where he would seek help from others, except when his faith fervor overtakes him, making him go searching for a field in which he could rekindle his spirit, his mind and conscious, to reassert himself by the ability of his faith, and his intimate ties to the nation.''

In modern times, other nations in the grip of totalitarian leaders -- Mao and Brezhnev, for example -- have stood by helplessly as the hierarch's abilities failed toward the end of a long period of unchallengeable power.

Watching the endless replays of the 65-year-old Mr. Hussein meeting with his inner circle, it is hard not to wonder if Iraq, too, isn't burdened with a system that has packed the upper levels of power with aging, infirm men inured by long experience not to question and never to challenge, and thus incapable now of placing their own hands more firmly on the tiller.

The fealty -- the fear -- seems manifest in every scene: men like Izzat Ibrahim, Taha Yassin Ramadan and Tariq Aziz, all in their late 60's or early 70's, laughing nervously at every hint of a witticism from the leader. Pens raised above notepads, their expressionless faces turn toward Mr. Hussein, silent and expectant. Only the Iraqi leader is ever shown speaking, save for moments when speeches are made by others in his praise. On lighter days, Havana cigars sent as gifts by Fidel Castro appear at every leader's side, but none is lit before Mr. Hussein's, and all are extinguished the instant the president stubs his out.

How much this pattern may be shaping Iraq's response to the Security Council's demands for a full accounting of its weapons of mass destruction is a matter to be divined. In his speeches, Mr. Hussein has sounded like a man terminally vexed, oscillating between submission and defiance.

Generals he has put forward to speak about weapons -- and to prepare the 12,000-page declaration now condemned for its omissions by Washington and by Hans Blix, leader of the inspection teams -- have reacted, at times, like men not sure whether full disclosure is the order of the day, or whether their brief is to admit only as much as the enemy is likely to find out.

The uncertainties flow down the government ranks. Officials who deal with Western reporters seem more than ever gripped by chronic indecision, quick to anger and often deeply afraid. In confessional moments, some even speak darkly of maneuverings at the highest levels.

Hovering at the edge of it all, some officials whisper, is the man who, to some Iraqis, is the most enigmatic and perhaps most threatening of all, Uday Saddam Hussein, at 38 the president's oldest son, and the rival of Mr. Hussein's other son, Qusay, 36.

Last month, Uday's wings were clipped when the government suspended his newspaper after it published articles that seemed intended to expose incompetence and corruption in the government. One repeated, ostensibly to condemn, a report in The Times of London that Saddam Hussein had paid tens of millions of dollars to the Libyan leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi, to assure a safe haven for Mr. Hussein's family in the event of war. Another castigated the information ministry for threatening foreign reporters who had been too assiduous in covering a rare public protest by mothers who had lost sons to Mr. Hussein's gulag.

Among Iraqis, Uday is best known as a man who has turned his revolver on unfortunates in his family and his father's coterie who have irritated or crossed him. If anybody but Saddam Hussein himself seems like the perfect totem for all that is past, it is Uday. Yet his posture now is to present himself as the one Iraqis can turn to, should they want a more modern man to lead them out of the dead end his father has led them to.

In a land of illusions, that could be the greatest illusion of them all.