THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraqi Slum Vows to Fight U.S. But It Couldn't Be Friendlier
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 1, 2003

Even in the huge slum of Saddam City, where a filthy tide of sewage laps the streets, where swirls of human hair and animal intestines pile up as garbage on a soccer field, where Saddam Hussein's portrait is not much seen in a poor place named after him, there is no crack in the official line.

''We are ready to confront the United States,'' said Halima Nebi, 57, matriarch of a family forced by poverty to pack 21 people into one apartment in Saddam City. ''We will use stones, bricks, guns, our own hands.''

So it comes as a surprise to American visitors here, only days or weeks before United States warplanes will most likely begin bombing near homes again, just how nice everyone is. Mrs. Nebi and her husband, Abdul, graciously served ''the enemy'' tea. They offered lunch repeatedly along with praise for the American people, if not their leaders. It is not just the Nebi household: no one here seems the slightest bit hostile.

What the Iraqis are thinking on the brink of war is thus a mystery of much importance. These people could turn the nation into a graveyard for American soldiers or could simply leave their leader to his fate.
War planners in Washington are hoping this apparently conflicted mood means there will be little fighting. Officials here in Iraq say they are handing out guns for deadly urban warfare -- and certainly most people interviewed in Saddam City, if in the presence of the government ''minders'' who accompany reporters everywhere, pledged to be the first to use them (while remaining charming to the American asking the questions).

The grand palaces and soaring mosques rising from central Baghdad flatten a few miles south at Saddam City to cheap concrete houses of two or three stories, which began sprouting in the 1950's and 1960's for people who came to the city to find work. The streets are broad, but herds of sheep patrol the medians eating garbage. More than a million people live here.

Most residents belong to the Shia sect, the majority in Iraq but with less power than Mr. Hussein's fellow Sunnis. In 1999, riots, rare here, erupted after the assassination of a prominent Shia cleric and two of his sons, for which some in Saddam City blamed the government. The Republican Guard, Mr. Hussein's elite troops, crushed the disturbances, and at least 27 people, perhaps 100 by some accounts, were killed.

Still, everyone professes loyalty, almost to the point of protesting too much.

''I am ready to defend my land,'' said Abdullah Muhammad, 42, a flour merchant, who bent over to show a mangled zipper of a scar on the back of his neck that he said was inflicted by an American round during desert fighting in the Persian Gulf war. ''Now it is different from 1991. Now all the world is with us, because we are in the right.''

There is, in fact, a difference this time -- and it may be the wild card for American soldiers who come here. Iraqi after Iraqi expressed it with a real feeling not always evident when they talk about Mr. Hussein himself: that in 1991, the Americans led a coalition against Iraqi troops who had invaded Kuwait.
This new attack will be a direct assault, perhaps with few allies, on an Iraq that is currently not at war. This nation where civilization stretches back thousands of years wonders why it falls to the United States to determine that their leader, whatever they think of him, must go.

''It is important to understand that in Iraqis' minds they have this conflict: 'I want to change my life and I want my leader to go,' '' a Western diplomat here said. ''At the same time: 'I am a nationalist. I am proud of my country. I am humiliated by American policy.' ''

''It's a mixed feeling,'' added the diplomat, who does not believe in the end that Iraqis will fight on the streets. ''They are waiting to be liberated, but they are not seeing the Americans as liberators.''

Slums anywhere, America included, say much about the nations they blight: in the case of Saddam City, what comes through to an outsider is how tightly the tentacles of Mr. Hussein's state enfold even a place that might seem less inclined to like him. In two days of interviews, there was no outward suggestion -- not the subtlest arch of an eyebrow -- of anything other than complete unanimity in support of Mr. Hussein.

But more than defiance against America, there seemed some blend of resignation, exhaustion, doubt that war would come -- and of course the reluctance to talk much to an outsider. ''We don't care about this,'' Sundus Edan, 25, a hairdresser at a shop full of wedding gowns and formal wear for women. ''We care about our families. We care about our businesses. We don't care about thinking about war.''

The hardship can be seen in the frilly white wedding dresses at the shop: they are rentals, a business that has grown in the last few years as Iraqis have become poorer. If the suffering of the Iraqi people has been documented in reams of reports -- more dead newborns, more disease and malnutrition, less electricity -- it is all perhaps most evident in Saddam City, the largest neighborhood in Baghdad, home of mostly very poor people.

The reason given for this poverty is the one provided by Mr. Hussein and disputed by American officials: that the suffering is the result of more than a decade of penalties, pushed hardest by the United States.
Thus a local official of Mr. Hussein's Baath Party, assigned to accompany a reporter for part of his tour, says the sewage would be flushed away underground if Iraq could import more pipes. The garbage, he said, would be gone if there were more trucks (though it is hard not to notice, too, the new trucks rolling out of a missile factory in northern Baghdad).

At the Ibn Al Balady hospital for mothers and children, Dr. Alhan A. Rashid, chief of pediatrics, gave a tour that included a stop near six incubators, most more than 10 years old, for premature babies. They cannot be replaced, she said, because of the penalties. ''They are working half and half,'' she said.

A cautious woman, she sidestepped as too political any questions about how the hospital might be preparing for war: there is a generator, she allowed, and it is tested regularly. While referring any specific questions to a psychiatric hospital, she said the pressure in Iraq was hurting the nation's health.

''Always this talking about war -- war, war, war,'' she said. ''It is bad for people.''

She did not want to talk about anything other than medicine or the penalties, but in the end she did. Nothing would make her happier, she said, than a flow of magazines and books, not the cheaply printed pirate versions, from the rest of the world. ''I like to read a very beautiful book,'' she said. ''I like to read novels and magazines.

''I like to read Women's Own and People to know what is going on outside of the country,'' she added. To top it off, she would like to read them and relax with a cup of coffee. ''That is very nice,'' she said.

Even with a more overt Islam that has accompanied the growing poverty, Iraq shows little of the anger toward America and Western culture seen, say, in Pakistan. But it would be too much to say that Iraqis yearn for Western culture in any deep way. (Sanctions have meant that Western music here is frozen somewhere between the eras of ''Love Story'' and ''Flashdance.'') Most experts believe that even if Iraqis do not fight any American invasion very hard, they would have much trouble accepting American military rule.

But in Saddam City, one person after the next was careful to draw the distinction between the Bush administration and the people themselves -- especially in recent days as Iraqi television has broadcast film of antiwar protests in America.
''We like American people,'' said Jabbar Hantoush Nasser, 58, just a few minutes after his son, Wathuq, 27, said he was trained and ready to kill American soldiers on the streets. ''They are with us against the threats of their leaders. We like them for this.''

As elsewhere in Iraq, there are few indications in Saddam City that anyone is seriously preparing for war. Shopkeepers say there is no run on food or milk, though the government gave two months' worth of food rations in January, with a third expected soon. The diplomat said there were rumors that people generally were buying guns, though he said it was unclear if they were to fight for Mr. Hussein or to guard their property in the event of chaos.

At a gym in Saddam City, Asmaa Abed Kadim, 33, a veteran of the gulf war who can bench press 300 pounds, said he, too, would fight if the Americans came. But he does not have a gun and appeared not to have anything definite planned. ''Me and my friends, all we talk about is sports and bodybuilding,'' he said.

A look of deep bafflement crossed his face when he was asked if he believed -- at this very late moment -- that the Bush administration's patience with Iraq had run out and that war would begin soon.

''War is not necessary,'' he said. ''I ask you: what are the reasons they would make war?''