THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE MOOD; South Dakota Call-Ups Bring Iraq Close to Home
By Jodi Wilgoren
March 9, 2003

Don Blumenberg sits by himself on a bench in the sale barn, apart from the men sipping coffee and scanning newspapers, as he bids on skinny Holsteins and heifers with the tiniest flick of his thumb, just the way his daddy taught him.

Mr. Blumenberg, 69, an Army veteran with a 1,500-head feedlot near here, has a philosophy for both cattle trading and geopolitics: ''Don't let anybody influence you at all. If everybody is running one way, you just do something different.''

So it does not bother him a bit that President Bush lacks support among some international leaders in his resolve to force a regime change in Iraq. A unilateral attack on Saddam Hussein fits Mr. Blumenberg's contrarian personality.

''I respect our freedoms; I think we've been infringed on way too much,'' he said. ''There's just a time and place where someone has to take a stand.''
Mr. Blumenberg's support reflects the instinctive loyalty to the commander in chief common in this state that voted 60 percent for Mr. Bush in 2000. But South Dakota also has an isolationist tradition dating back to the Spanish-American War, and a senator, Tom Daschle, who as the Senate Democratic leader has been a loud voice of dissent on this issue.

This is a deeply patriotic place, yet one governed by the pragmatism of people whose livelihood depends on the fickle weather. There is a prairie populism threading through the remote rural towns that makes many people here question international entanglements. And while South Dakota is isolated by geography, the military call-ups have brought this conflict very close to home.

''We're a poor agricultural state, and we're sending all the guys over there -- he hasn't convinced me we have to do it,'' said Curt Talley, 48, an insurance agent who wore Mardi Gras beads as he welcomed guests to the Shrove Tuesday pancake feed at the United Methodist Church. ''If there was evidence, we'd see it. I've been looking at the paper, watching TV. I haven't seen it. If it was a matter of national security, I'd be for it, but if it's about oil, I'm against it.''

Mitchell, a town of 14,558 about 65 miles west of Sioux Falls, is best known as the home of the world's only Corn Palace, a sports arena whose walls are decorated with murals made each summer from 2,500 bushels of dried corn. It is also the home of George McGovern, whose 1972 presidential campaign embodied the antiwar movement in the Vietnam era. And the home of Mike Miller, the 2001 NBA rookie of the year, whose uncle, Alan, a math teacher and an assistant coach of the top-ranked girls' basketball team at Mitchell High, is among the 87 local men whose National Guard unit was just called up for duty.

In conversations with 60 residents here over several days -- at the cattle auction and the pancake feed, at the daily businessmen's kaffeeklatsch at the Country Kitchen, a basketball game at the Corn Palace and in a high school government class -- support for Mr. Bush clearly outweighed discomfort with unilateral action. Many were eager for the invasion to start, though some said they feared it would escalate into a prolonged world war, threatening safety even here in flyover country.
South Dakota ranks third among the states for the percentage of people enrolled in the National Guard, with 58 percent; and 35 percent of its 4,500 troops have been activated or put on alert so far.

Here in Mitchell, that includes two of the town's 16 police officers; two members of Ascension Lutheran Church; three from Holy Family Catholic Church; Stan Rietveld's secretary's husband; and Deb Bell's 21-year-old son, Chad. In Andrew Tate's government class at the high school, all 25 students know at least one person -- besides Mr. Miller, who teaches down the hall -- on the way to the Middle East.

''I have friends and I have family,'' said Wendy Rogynski, a senior. ''You don't know if they're going to come back.''

The men who gather at the Country Kitchen's round table every day at 3 p.m. for coffee (more regular than decaf) and conversation are Bush-loyalists, Daschle-denouncers, McGovern-haters. They disagree far more fervently over ice-fishing spots than over foreign policy.

''We need to get it on,'' Mr. Rietveld, 61, an insurance agent, said the other day. As for the reluctant French, he added, ''they might have good wine and their cheese is pretty good and their perfume smells O.K.,'' but why should they dictate what we do?

''The French were a part of the group that appeased Hitler in World War II; we can't let that happen,'' piped in Milton E. Nelson, 54, a real estate developer. ''Once the war breaks out, they'll fall in behind us.''

From this table, the antiwar protests look like just so much big-city nonsense. California is, as Mr. Rietveld said, ''a different world.'' Those who want to wait for the United Nations are probably the same people who support what opponents call partial-birth abortion, the men say, the folks who want to excise ''under God'' from the Pledge of Allegiance.
''I'm getting tired of the minority ruling,'' said Joe Schultz, 63, who owns apartment buildings in town. ''What annoys me is they protest -- we don't want this, we don't want that -- well, what should we do?''

The businessmen's unanimity, though, is not ubiquitous.

While South Dakota votes Republican for presidents and governors, its United States Senate seats have been dominated by Democrats since 1960. Alan Clem, an emeritus professor of political science at the University of South Dakota, said agrarian populism plus conservative Christianity had often equaled isolationist dissent here.

This is the state whose senator, Richard Pettigrew, resigned from the Republican Party a century ago because of his opposition to imperialist expansion . Another senator, William Bulow, was reluctant to become involved with Europe between the world wars. Along with Mr. McGovern, who recently led a group of former senators signing a statement against an invasion of Iraq, former Senator James Abourezk has been speaking and writing against a war.

''There's a history of independence,'' said David Kranz, longtime political columnist for The Sioux Falls Argus Leader. ''As this goes on, it's not hard in this state to find pretty solid Republicans who will say, 'What are we doing this war for? I really don't like the sound of it, I don't like the feel of it.' Rather than a gung-ho, damn-the-torpedoes type thing, it's more of a let's-just-make-sure-we-support-our-cause here. We don't want them standing out there alone in the field.''

At the church pancake and sausage supper, where a man from Iowa tossed flapjacks 10 feet from griddle to plate, there were people who had traveled to Sioux Falls and Minneapolis for recent antiwar protests, as well as those who said they backed whatever President Bush wants. Some of these people are married to each other.

''I'm very concerned that we don't have the support of the world community,'' said Mary Liz Crockett, 48, as her three young sons gobbled up hot cakes.

Her husband, Rex, said, ''I don't think he should even think about the allies.''

The church pastor, the Rev. Hank Kor, said that the United States was being a bully. Tom Jorgensen, the piano player, who was on his way to Washington to lobby on Medicare, said there were more pressing domestic priorities. Lyle Swenson, the retired sheriff now running for mayor of Mitchell, worried whether ''America is ready for it, when they start bringing the body bags back.''
With the Mitchell-based Alpha Battery of the South Dakota National Guard's 1st Batallion of the 147th Field Artillery facing deployment on March 15 -- to Fort Sill, Okla., for 21 days, and then to parts unknown -- the potential for body bags is not theoretical here. Mrs. Bell, Chad's mother, cried in the stands of the Corn Palace when she got the news about his call-up while at a basketball game on Feb. 27. She cries while watching television. The other night, when she arrived home to see Chad had shaved his head, military style, she rushed to the bathroom to hide her tears.

''We're positive in front of each other,'' she said, ''but I do a lot of running to the bathroom.''

Sgt. Darwyn Persson, the leader of the Mitchell guard unit, said Mr. Miller, a childhood friend, had been calling him three times a day since the unit went on pre-alert status six weeks ago, just to check.

''There's some people that hope we stay at Fort Sill, but the majority of them, 90 percent, say if we're going to go, let's go to Iraq,'' Sergeant Persson said of his men. ''They set a resolution out there. They didn't comply. It's just like a kid. How long are you going to let him get away with stuff?''

At the high school, Mr. Miller's math students are frustrated at the prospect of having to figure out a substitute teacher's style with only two months left before finals. The other day, when Christina Ahrendt, 16, told Mr. Miller she was scared about a test, he responded, ''You're scared?''

Mr. Miller, 39, is leaving not just his students, but four children of his own, one a senior who will most likely graduate in May without him watching. The state basketball tournament in Watertown starts on Thursday, and Mr. Miller plans to take his guard uniform with him. The championship game is scheduled for March 15, the day of deployment.
