A NATION AT WAR: BAGHDAD; Iraqis Threatening New Suicide Strikes Against U.S. Forces
By John F. Burns
March 30, 2003

One of Iraq's top leaders said today that Saddam Hussein's government was ready to meet the overwhelming military superiority of the United States by resorting to widespread suicide attacks against Americans and British troops ''and all who support them,'' both inside Iraq and elsewhere in the Arab world.

Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan, ranked No. 3 in the Iraqi hierarchy, said at a news conference that the soldier who killed four Americans in a suicide attack earlier today outside the holy city of Najaf was the first in a wave of Iraqis and other Arab volunteers ready to become ''martyrs.'' Arabs outside Iraq, he said, should help ''turn every country in the world into a battlefield.''

In an hourlong display of defiance and threat, Mr. Ramadan, regarded as one of the most zealous of the men around Mr. Hussein, said there were ''battalions'' of Arab militants arriving in Baghdad to join the fanatical paramilitaries known here as the fedayeen, or martyrs for God. Those men, he said, were eager to follow the example of Ali Hammadi al-Namani, the Iraqi soldier posing as a taxi driver who was identified by the Baghdad government as the bomber who killed the American soldiers at Najaf.

The American forces in Iraq, Mr. Ramadan said, had ''seen nothing yet,'' compared with what lay ahead from the Arab volunteers. ''These are not suicide fighters,'' Mr. Ramadan said, but men following in a long tradition of martyrdom in the Islamic world. ''Those who commit suicide are desperate people,'' he said. ''They are not filled as the martyrs are with faith and confidence in the Arab nation and in their homeland.''
He added: ''I say to the United States administration, that it will turn the whole world into people who are willing to die for their nations. The aggressors think that their B-52's carry bombs of such weight that they are capable of killing an unlimited number of people. Should we wait until Arabs are capable of making bombs to counter that? No, all they can do is turn themselves into human bombs. If the B-52 bomber can kill 500 people at one time, I am sure that our operations by freedom fighters will be able to kill 5,000 people.''

Mr. Namani, the soldier who killed the Americans, was lauded as a hero on Iraqi state television tonight. The broadcasts said Mr. Hussein, who was shown earlier meeting with top military officers, had awarded the dead man two posthumous medals.

Mr. Ramadan hinted that similar attacks were being prepared. ''You will hear more good news in the coming days, he said. ''The people of Iraq will receive the aggressors in the way that they should be received.''

The Iraqi official implied that many of the Arab volunteers for suicide attacks had come to Baghdad from the Persian Gulf states whose governments were supporting the American-led war, and from Saudi Arabia. It was now time, he said, for the populations of those countries to support Iraq in its ''decisive battle'' with America, and ''turn every country in the Arab world into a battlefield, not only against those who wear the military uniforms of the United States and the United Kingdom, but against all who support them.''

Although overheated polemics are a feature of the Baghdad leadership, no member of the group around Mr. Hussein has ever explicitly embraced suicide attacks as a potential Iraqi weapon. Mr. Hussein announced last year that he would pay $25,000 to the family of any Palestinian suicide bomber, and rallies have been held on the West Bank to celebrate the Iraqi funds. But in its efforts to avoid a new war with the United States, the Baghdad government vehemently insisted, up to only 10 days ago, that it was not a rogue state -- that it had no banned chemical, biological or chemical weapons, and no ties to terrorist groups. Today, that insistence was effectively abandoned. ''Any method that stops or kills the enemy will be used,'' Mr. Ramadan said.
While Iraq sent its first suicide bomber against the Americans, the United States early this morning had its own surprise for the Iraqis. American Tomahawk missiles struck directly through the roof of Iraq's 11-story Information Ministry in Baghdad, forcing officials to abandon the building and move an important part of Iraq's war effort, its propaganda machine, across the Tigris River to the Palestine Hotel.

Along with the stiff resistance Iraqi fighters have mounted against American troops advancing toward Baghdad, the government here has sought to marshal world opinion to its side with accounts of its struggle against America. That has made the Information Ministry, in effect, part of Iraq's front line, its principal task to raise international protests against the United States and Britain to the point where, the Iraqis hope, the allies will be forced to abandon the effort to overthrow Mr. Hussein.

The missile attack came at around 1:15 a.m., and reduced satellite dishes and other communications antennas on the roof to scrap metal, still visible from the ground but punctured with holes like collanders.

At daybreak, jumpy Iraqi security men with Kalashnikov rifles prevented Western reporters from entering the interior of the ministry, but shattered windows on every floor suggested that the missiles had penetrated deep into the building's core.

By midafternoon, ministry officials announced they were moving operations, at least those involving the control of Western reporters in Baghdad, about a mile and a half away to the Palestine Hotel, where most of the remaining foreign reporters are staying.

The decision reflected a broader trend as the war moved through its 10th day. With the daunting military challenges still lying between Baghdad and American military units checked in their advance toward the capital, intensified American air power has become essential to maintaining pressure on Mr. Hussein and his inner circle of leaders.

Viewed from on the ground in Baghdad, the American strategy has seemed to involve hitting major government targets hard and often enough to try to break the Iraqi leader's iron grip on every aspect of government activity here.
Since he began his rise to power more than 40 years ago as one of a group that tried -- unsuccessfully -- to kill Iraq's first military ruler in central Bahgdad, Mr. Hussein has shown himself to be a master of the clandestine arts, always keeping a step ahead of those seeking to kill or weaken him.

With the war now well into its second week, the signs here are that he has so far lost none of his ability to compel loyalty and fear, despite what appears to have been a narrow escape from an American attempt to kill him with a cruise missile strike that was the opening blow of the war in the early hours of March 20.

It is unknown where the Iraqi ruler is -- in Baghdad or in some hideaway in the desert, perhaps in his hometown, Tikrit; in some deep bunker complex, or driving about Baghdad in a battered Volkswagen, alone but for a driver, as he is reputed to have done during the American air attacks that accompanied the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

But the pattern of American air attacks in the past 72 hours suggests that the Pentagon believes it can make life a lot more difficult for the Iraqi leader, and perhaps even cut him off from communicating with his political subordinates and military commanders.

On Thursday and Friday, the American Central Command headquarters in Qatar confirmed that B-2 stealth bombers had dropped 4,700-pound American ''bunker buster'' bombs on three of Baghdad's main telephone exchanges. One, on Friday, reportedly hit the high-rise tower beside the Tigris that handles all international calls, but appeared to plunge deep into the building's basement from an entry point on its side without exploding, or at least without doing any major damage. Today, international land-line calls continued to operate normally.

But much of the rest of the city was without domestic telephone service after American bombs obliterated two switching centers, one on either side of the Tigris.

The strike on the Information Ministry, which Pentagon officials have described as a conduit for secret communications as well as for the more conventional work of a government propaganda agency, demonstrated the accuracy of many of the American airstrikes.
With the building effectively abandoned after the Pentagon's warnings, officials said that nobody had been killed, and only one man, apparently a security guard, had been injured. The only Iraqis who seemed to have stuck to their posts were the men who sell sugary cups of tea across the street and shoeshine boys.

One success that has bolstered the sense of defiance in Baghdad is the continued broadcasting by Iraqi state television throughout the war. Although its headquarters next to the Information Ministry is a Swiss cheese of bomb and missile strikes, the system's principal channel has remained on air for all but the first five hours after the initial American strike earlier this week.

One focus for the state network today was the aftermath of the bombing on Friday evening at a market outside Baghdad that Iraqi officials, and many survivors, blamed on an American aircraft or missile. Doctors said the death toll had risen to 62, with 49 injured. An American military spokesman said the incident was under investigation, to determine whether the attack involved an American mistake in establishing the target, or possibly a misfired Iraqi antiaircraft missile.
