THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; U.S. SET TO PUSH FOR A U.N. DEBATE ON WAR WITH IRAQ
By Julia Preston
Jan. 30, 2003

The United States put the Security Council on notice today that the time for disarming Iraq peacefully was coming to an end and that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell would open a debate here next week on authorizing war.

''The diplomatic window is closing,'' John D. Negroponte, the American ambassador, said. ''We feel that the time for decision-making is fast approaching.''

In an effort to break an impasse and persuade skeptics at the United Nations that Baghdad must be disarmed by force, Mr. Powell will come before the Council next Wednesday to present what the United States considers evidence that Iraq has links to terrorism and is continuing to develop secret weapons of mass destruction, American diplomats said.

They added that he would set in motion the provisions of Resolution 1441 that call for a new debate in the Council if Iraq has definitively failed to eliminate its illegal weapons; 1441 is the resolution that enabled weapons inspections in Iraq.
In what was construed as part of a Bush administration effort to keep the pressure on Saddam Hussein's government, Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, broke with recent practice at a Pentagon news briefing today, giving a hint of American troop movements into northern Iraq.

''I don't think we want to get into where our forces are right now,'' the general said, ''but there are not significant military forces in northern Iraq right now.''

Despite President Bush's fierce indictment of Mr. Hussein in his State of the Union address on Tuesday, the United States met broad resistance on the Council today to moving toward war. However, many Council nations said they would welcome Mr. Powell's presentation, and diplomats said privately that they were hoping he would present evidence convincing enough to break the impasse.

The raised expectations and new emphasis on the evidence seemed only to strengthen the pressure on Mr. Powell; it remained unclear whether evidence that had convinced Washington would persuade skeptics at the United Nations.

One of them, Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin of France, a veto-bearing Council member, said in Paris today that he ''rejoiced'' at Mr. Bush's decision to present the administration's evidence against Iraq to the Council.
But, emphasizing a view that differs sharply from Washington's, Mr. de Villepin said he hoped the intelligence that Mr. Powell is to display would help create ''better conditions'' for United Nations weapons inspectors to carry on their work. American diplomats made it clear that Mr. Powell did not intend to facilitate the inspections but rather to show why they were not working.

Germany, a nonpermanent Council member, echoed France's position. But Chancellor Gerhard Schröder said today in Berlin that he was no longer certain that war with Iraq could be averted. He said he had doubts ''whether we will succeed in avoiding war and resolving the conflict peacefully.''

One possibility for a peaceful resolution -- which the Saudi foreign minister, Saud al-Faisal, is seeking to pursue with Mr. Bush -- would be Mr. Hussein's exile from Iraq.

Mr. Powell touched on the idea today, saying of Mr. Hussein, ''If he were to leave the country and take some of his family members with him and others in the leading elite who have been responsible for so much trouble during the course of his regime, we would, I'm sure, try to help find a place for them to go.''

In interviews with French, German, Italian and British television stations, Mr. Powell sought to rally support in Europe. Talking tough, he said he did not know whether he could get the Council to see things the administration's way.

After his presentation on Wednesday, he said, ''we will have time to discuss this and make a judgment.''

''And perhaps there will be unity, perhaps not,'' he added. ''But one way or the other, Saddam Hussein must be disarmed.''
Germany announced today that Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer would lead the meeting at which Mr. Powell is to speak, because Germany holds the rotating presidency of the Council in February. Mr. de Villepin and Foreign Secretary Jack Straw of Britain have also said they will attend, and Washington is pressing foreign ministers from China and Russia to come.

The Council met today in a closed session and each of the 15 nations expressed their reactions to reports on two months of work that the chief weapons inspectors, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, presented on Monday. Mr. Blix presented a detailed, negative assessment of Iraq's cooperation with chemical and biological weapons inspections, while Mr. ElBaradei said his team had found no evidence that Iraq has renewed its nuclear program.

At least 11 Council nations, including France, Russia and China, said the weapons inspections should be given more time, but urged Iraq to provide better cooperation.

''The majority in the Council thinks that we should continue the inspections, inspectors should have some time, more time,'' said the French ambassador, Jean-Marc de la Sablière, the Council president this month. He said France would like to give the inspections ''weeks or months, as long as the inspection system is producing results.''

While President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia suggested on Monday that Russia might be shifting its stance, Moscow's envoy here, Sergey Lavrov, made it clear that this would not happen before Mr. Powell speaks.

''We have not seen any reason so far to undercut the inspections process,'' Mr. Lavrov said.

Asked what Russia would like to see in Mr. Powell's presentation, he said testily: ''Are you seriously asking me this question? We would like to see undeniable proof, O.K.?''

Spain's envoy, Inocencio F. Arias, leaned toward the United States.

''We are completely skeptical about the Iraqi regime,'' he said. ''The United Nations -- not the United States, not Tom Cruise -- says Iraq must cooperate actively.''
After demands from the arms chiefs and every Council nation for Iraq to show it intends to disarm, Baghdad responded today with a seven-page document of critical comments on Mr. Blix's report. In an interview this evening, Mr. Blix said it contained no new information.

Mr. Negroponte, for his part, said there would be a rush of diplomacy before next Wednesday in which the Bush administration would try to win support. He said he saw little more time for the inspections, calling the situation ''urgent'' and ''pressing.''

American diplomats said they were not preparing any new resolution to put to a Council vote. But Britain, which strongly seconded the United States today, has continued to urge Washington to consider offering a limited resolution to satisfy European demands for a second Council vote before war, diplomats said.

This week British officials have been preparing possible drafts in London, the diplomats said. One possibility would be for the Council to set a maximum 30-day deadline for Iraq to show an unmistakable change of heart. British officials are hoping to extend the inspections longer than the Bush administration seems to envisage, because they have more confidence that the inspectors can find damning evidence in Iraq or will run into some confrontation there that will clearly show Iraq is not letting them work.

With opposition running strong on the Council, American officials acknowledged that much would depend on Mr. Powell's evidence.

IRAQ INSPECTIONS

Convening the U.N., by the Numbers

When President Bush, in his State of the Union address, said the United States would ask the United Nations Security Council to convene on Feb. 5, he was referring to a process set out in Security Council Resolution 1441 on Nov. 8, 2002. It sets the conditions for inspections of Iraq's weapons programs. Here are the relevant parts of the resolution, listing Council actions:

PARAGRAPH 4 -- Decides that false statements or omissions in the declarations submitted by Iraq pursuant to this resolution and failure by Iraq at any time to comply with, and cooperate fully in the implementation of, this resolution shall constitute a further material breach of Iraq's obligations and will be reported to the Council for assessment in accordance with paragraphs 11 and 12 below;

PARAGRAPH 11 -- Directs the executive chairman of Unmovic and the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency to report immediately to the Council any interference by Iraq with inspection activities, as well as any failure by Iraq to comply with its disarmament obligations, including its obligations regarding inspections under this resolution;
PARAGRAPH 12 -- Decides to convene immediately upon receipt of a report in accordance with paragraphs 4 or 11 above, in order to consider the situation and the need for full compliance with all of the relevant Council resolutions in order to secure international peace and security;

PARAGRAPH 13 -- Recalls, in that context, that the Council has repeatedly warned Iraq that it will face serious consequences as a result of its continued violations of its obligations;

In Resolution 1441, the Security Council wrote that it was acting under Chapter VII of the United Nations charter, which lists specific enforcement measures. Article 41 of that chapter lays out possible nonmilitary measures. Article 42 takes the next step, and reads as follows:

ARTICLE 42 -- Should the Security Council consider that measures provided for in Article 41 would be inadequate or have proved to be inadequate, it may take such action by air, sea, or land forces as may be necessary to maintain or restore international peace and security. Such action may include demonstrations, blockade, and other operations by air, sea or land forces of members of the United Nations.
A version of this article appears in print on Jan. 30, 2003, Section A, Page 1 of the National edition with the headline: THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; U.S. SET TO PUSH FOR A U.N. DEBATE ON WAR WITH IRAQ. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe
