Iraqi Star Tours U.S. And Sings Of Baghdad
By Neil Strauss
Feb. 26, 2003

In ''Beauty and His Love,'' the singer Kazem al-Sahir confesses to his girlfriend that there is someone he loves more than her, someone whom he sleeps with every night, someone whom he dreams of daily. His distraught girlfriend begs him to reveal the name of this lover. Her name, he finally tells her, is Baghdad.

''It is one of my most popular songs,'' Mr. Sahir said, sitting in a restaurant at the Palms Casino Resort here for his first in-person interview since arriving in the United States from a video shoot in Morocco. ''Whenever I sing it, the audience asks that I repeat it, again and again. But I will only sing it twice in a concert.''

Mr. Sahir, 41, is not only Iraq's biggest pop star but also one of the most popular singers in the Arab world, a dashing romantic who has sold about 31 million albums. And as Iraq and the United States prepare for war, he has chosen to do something that almost any thinking person would say was foolish. He is starting an American tour.

It began on Saturday night with a private performance for the Maloofs, the Lebanese-American family that owns the Palms, and their guests. Mr. Sahir is scheduled to perform in Manhattan on Friday night at the Beacon Theatre.
''My friends, they didn't want me to come here now,'' Mr. Sahir said, conducting his first interview mostly in English since hiring a tutor two years ago. ''It's a difficult time.''

Brian Taylor Goldstein, the arts attorney who obtained Mr. Sahir's work visa, said: ''Getting an Iraqi singer in right now was not the easiest thing in the world. And the V3 category of visa, for culturally unique performers like Kazem, has been especially difficult, because it often means the artist is coming from a non-Western culture.''

It helped that Mr. Sahir had a Canadian passport, because his children and his wife, from whom he is separated, live there. Though he left Iraq in the early 1990's and has become a Canadian citizen (he has homes in Cairo, Dubai, Paris and Toronto), he still says that Iraq will always be his home. He said he felt compelled to tour so that he could ''show another face of my country'' and inspire Americans to ''think good thoughts -- not all bad thoughts -- of my people.''

When he sat next to Kofi Annan, the secretary general of the United Nations, on a flight recently, Mr. Sahir said, he handed him a CD and wrote on it, ''Don't forget about Iraqi children.''

Fans of his long, symphonic, sinuous songs of romantic love include two Grammy winners: Carlos Santana, who has arranged to meet Mr. Sahir after the Iraqi singer's Berkeley show next week, and the soprano Sarah Brightman, who sang a duet with him, ''The War Is Over,'' for her next album.
When the BBC World Service asked its listeners to come up with the ''world's Top 10 favorite'' songs, Mr. Sahir's ''Ana wa Laila'' (''Me and Laila') was No. 6, two places above Cher's ''Believe.''

With close-cropped black hair, a stocky build, a chiseled face, a hooded sweatshirt and blue jeans, Mr. Sahir looked more like a soccer player than a pop singer. He moved through the casino without bodyguards or an entourage, said he was not worried about his safety while in the United States, did not believe that the government here was monitoring his movement and seemed surprised when asked if it was difficult for him to get obtain a work permit.

In fact, to some degree, he seemed almost unaware that being an Iraqi in the United States today was far different from what it was 17 months ago, a change that has prevented many Middle Eastern musicians from obtaining work permits and visas. ''He has no fear,'' said Dawn Elder, his manager in North America and Europe. ''He says if something is going to happen to him, it's going to happen. He believes in living life to its fullest. And I agree: you need to not be afraid of life.''

For others, to see him perform is to make a statement. Leigh-Ann Hahn, a world-music presenter who flew in from Los Angeles for the show, said: ''When I told my mother I was going to an Arabic-owned resort to see an Iraqi musician, she was aghast. But I told her that he was a renowned vocalist, he was carrying a message of peace, and it was important that I have the opportunity to see him perform.''

Iraq is considered by some to be the cradle of classic Arabic poetry and music, a tradition carried on by the Musical Institute of Baghdad, where Mr. Sahir studied. Born in northern Iraq, he lived in austerity with nine siblings. At age 10 he sold his bicycle to buy a guitar and started inventing romantic stories for his girlfriends. By age 13 he was not only writing love letters for his older brothers to send to girlfriends but also composing classical-based songs for his own girlfriends.

Known primarily as a songwriter for other musicians, he worked for several years to persuade the music establishment there to let him both compose and sing his own songs. And when he finally appeared on television with his own ''Ladghat el Hayya'' (''The Snake Bite'') in 1987, it was banned for lyrics that discussed Baghdad's atmosphere of fear and restriction near the end of the Iran-Iraq war.
He soon earned a reputation for being an exacting, detail-oriented composer with one foot in the classical world and the other in the pop world. He revived traditional romantic classical music and incorporated out-of-use Arabic musical scales, paved the way for other contemporary Iraqi singers to seek fame outside the country, collaborated with some of the Arab world's finest poets and refused to replace his large orchestra with synthesizers. He is composing an opera based on the ''Epic of Gilgamesh.''

The Persian Gulf war and the ensuing embargo, however, had a heavy impact on his art and career, which was derailed for several years. ''There was no electricity and no petrol,'' he recalled. ''I had to bike two or three hours to see my friends. But I composed my best songs in this time.''

During the bombings, he continued, he put all his music in a part of the house as far from his bedroom as possible. He wrote a note that he placed on top of the recordings, instructing whoever found them to release the music. This way, he said, if the house was bombed during the night, ''either me or my music would survive.''

When the interview turned political, Mr. Sahir politely sidestepped the questions, as he has throughout his career. But when asked what he would like to say to President Bush, he answered: ''Think about the children and the innocent people. Don't let them suffer.''

When asked what he would like to say to Mr. Hussein (whom he said he had never met), he laughed, looked at the floor and grinned. Whatever he thought, he kept it to himself.

Though he has written political songs about topics like Iraq's starving children, Mr. Sahir is primarily a singer of romantic songs -- passionately delivered, occasionally playful, poems of love to make women swoon. ''Ana wa Laila,'' which he tinkered with for some five years until he was satisfied, is a song about a man who cannot extinguish his passion for a woman who does not love him in return because he is not rich.
''Everything you see now on the TV is about the negative, the war, the weapons of mass destruction, the killings, the explosives,'' he said. ''We need something lighter now to feel a little bit of hope and to relax.''

At the Key West Room in the Palms the next night, the audience didn't quite relax as Mr. Sahir performed. And for that matter, neither did Mr. Sahir, who was at his exacting best, leading his band through a two-hour set. Keenly calibrating the mood of the audience, he constantly deviated from the set list, cut songs short and doubled the choruses of other hits, constantly challenging the 15 Arabic-American musicians performing with him for the first time. At the same time, he refused to play songs with complicated orchestrations -- often stopping them after several seconds and then restarting -- until the audience was playing full attention. When a scuffle broke out in the audience during his first big hit, ''Abart al Shat'' (''Crossing the River''), he quickly changed to less rousing numbers.

When he performed ''Beauty and His Love,'' the audience sat patiently for this one, waiting for the right moment. As soon as he bellowed the name of his true love, the people in the audience erupted, rising to their feet. And for a brief moment, the word Baghdad in this country was associated not with war and tyranny but with beauty and homesickness.
Correction: March 4, 2003
An article on Wednesday about the Iraqi singer Kazem al-Sahir, who is touring the United States, misidentified the category of visa he required. The visa, for culturally unique performers, is a P-3, not a V3.
