
Administration Seeking to Build Support in Congress on Iraq Issue
By Richard A. Oppel Jr. With Julia Preston
Aug. 30, 2002


The Bush administration sought today to shore up Congressional support for a campaign against Iraq, even as it tried to head off pressure from Britain and France to work through the United Nations before taking any action against Saddam Hussein.

Vice President Dick Cheney, who has emerged in the last week as the administration's most public and hawkish defender of potential military action against Iraq, said today in a speech here to Korean War veterans that the administration would ''consult widely with our Congress'' before deciding whether to go to war.

He also said President Bush had instructed administration officials to cooperate fully in Congressional hearings on the matter next month, but he did not make clear whether the administration would seek a formal vote on an authorization of war, as some lawmakers have said would be required.

Reiterating positions from a speech he made on Monday, Mr. Cheney sought to undercut the arguments of critics who have urged a return to United Nations weapons inspections in Iraq. He said inspectors in the past had failed to uncover evidence that Iraq was in fact continuing to mass-produce deadly chemical agents.
His statement came as several nations, including France and Britain, called on the administration today to continue to work through the United Nations in its confrontation with President Hussein.

President Jacques Chirac of France reiterated his demand that any military action against Iraq be approved by the Security Council and criticized what he called ''attempts to legitimize the unilateral and pre-emptive use of force.''

Without mentioning the United States by name, the French president called such attempts ''worrying,'' adding: ''This runs contrary to the vision of collective security of France, a vision that is based on cooperation among states, respect for the law and the authority of the Security Council. We shall repeat these rules as often as needed, and notably over Iraq.''

Mr. Chirac's remarks contrasted with comments by his foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, who indicated on Tuesday that France would avoid any criticism of the Bush administration as a means of gaining the maximum leverage over any decision by Washington to wage war against Iraq.

In Britain, where the government is facing mounting domestic opposition to the prospect of an American-led invasion of Iraq, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw reaffirmed his nation's commitment to the return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Baghdad.
In an interview published today in the Financial Times, Mr. Straw sought to walk a fine line, reiterating Britain's support for Washington while saying his government was ''putting the ball back in Saddam Hussein's court'' by seeking to force him to allow inspections of potential weapons sites to resume.

While conceding that new inspections ''would provide no assurance of itself that there would be compliance,'' Mr. Straw said they would nonetheless represent ''a first step on the way to ensuring compliance.''

Mr. Cheney displayed no such confidence today. Returning to a theme he struck earlier this week, he singled out for criticism those who advocate relying on weapons inspections to answer concerns about Iraq's development of biological, nuclear and chemical armaments.

Mr. Cheney said that in 1995 the inspectors, who were later barred from the country, ''were actually on the verge of declaring that Saddam's programs to develop chemical weapons and ballistic missile had been fully accounted for and shut down.''

Only later, aided by defectors, did they realize that Iraq ''had kept them largely in the dark about the extent of his program to mass-produce VX, one of the deadliest chemicals known to man,'' he said.

''Far from having shut down Iraq's prohibited missile program,'' Mr. Cheney continued, ''the inspectors found that Saddam had continued to test such missiles almost literally under the noses of U.N. inspectors.''

At the State Department today, the spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said inspectors could still play an important role in Iraq, but he emphasized that Mr. Hussein must be ousted.
''Inspectors have a role either way, but the only way to really solve the problem is through regime change,'' Mr. Boucher said.

Mr. Cheney's speech was the second time in a week he had made a forceful presentation of why Mr. Hussein should be removed. The vice president's high-profile appearance on the issue was a striking contrast to the low-key role Mr. Bush has chosen to play in recent days on the issue -- a role White House officials say is s no accident.

The officials suggest that Mr. Bush is not likely to address the question of Iraq publicly at any length until he addresses the United Nations on Sept. 12 in New York, leaving Mr. Cheney in the role of paving the way for the president on what may be the most crucial decision of his presidency.

The Bush administration's threat of a pre-emptive attack to stop Mr. Hussein from using highly lethal weapons that Washington says he is developing is causing much concern at the United Nations. It appears to go against basic principles of an organization that operates on the basis of respect for sovereign states, often with great tolerance for renegade governments as long as they stay within their borders.

Many nations also fear that if the administration sidelines the United Nations, it will generate paralyzing doubts about the role of the organization in international security in general.

The United Nations is the main forum where major United States allies, especially France, Britain and Russia, exert their influence in international affairs.

The organization withdrew its weapons inspectors from Iraq in December 1998, just before a bombing attack by the United States and Britain. Since then, Mr. Hussein has refused to allow them to return.
In an interview to be published on Friday in the newspaper Münchner Merkur, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany said the United States must consult with its allies before deciding on an attack on Iraq, and he warned that Washington was undermining the United Nations effort to monitor Iraq's weapons by insisting that there is no alternative to ousting Mr. Hussein.

In recent weeks, the United States has backed away from engaging in the Security Council's pressure on Iraq about the inspectors, Council diplomats said. American diplomats have indicated that they see the effort as increasingly fruitless.

But the flux in United States policy was apparent on Tuesday, one day after Mr. Cheney's first speech, when John D. Negroponte, the ambassador to the United Nations, said the weapons inspections, if carried out with the full cooperation of Iraq, would be an ''important part of the resolution'' of disarming Baghdad. He did not elaborate.

No other Security Council nations have shown that they are ready, at this point, to give up on the inspections process.

Indeed, a growing number of nations sees a potential threat in the Bush administration's drive to oust Mr. Hussein if Washington does not bring its case before the world organization.

''The issue is no longer how threatening is Saddam Hussein, but how dangerous for the rest of the world is what the United States is planning to do to Saddam Hussein,'' a Security Council diplomat said.

The head of the United Nations inspection team, Hans Blix, maintains considerable confidence among Council members. Mr. Blix is a seasoned expert in weapons assessment, having served for 16 years as head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the world nuclear monitor. Most Council nations believe that he would not allow the Iraqi government to dupe or stall him.
On the domestic front, Mr. Cheney's comments today showed that the administration was willing to engage Congress to a greater extent than it initially indicated, even though the White House counsel has determined that Mr. Bush does not need any Congressional approval to take action against Iraq. Lawmakers from both parties have said it would be unwise for the White House to act without a sign of support from the House and Senate.

The president will ''consult widely with our Congress, with our friends and allies around the world before deciding on a course of action,'' Mr. Cheney said today. ''He welcomes the debate that has been joined here at home, and he has made it clear to his national security team that he wants us to participate fully in the hearings that would be held in Congress next month on this vitally important issue.''

He added that Mr. Bush ''will proceed cautiously and deliberately to consider all possible options to deal with the threat that Iraq, ruled by Saddam Hussein, represents.''

But just as he sought to mollify detractors in Congress, Mr. Cheney used the speech today to paint critics of the administration's policy as naïve and unwilling to grasp the significance that Iraq has chemical weapons and that ''many of us are convinced that Saddam will acquire'' nuclear weapons ''fairly soon.''

In the last week Mr. Cheney has used two veterans' events to outline his rationale for attacking Iraq. His appearance today could hardly have come before a more patriotic setting: Mr. Cheney addressed a reunion of the ''Chosin Few,'' a group of servicemen who survived a huge assault by Chinese troops and subzero temperatures at the Chosin Reservoir in Korea during the winter of 1950.
