A NATION AT WAR: THE ATTACK; U.S. BOMBS RAVAGE TARGETS IN BAGHDAD; WAVES OF TROOPS SWEEPING SOUTH IRAQ
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 22, 2003

In a blaze of heavy bombing, American air power devastated parts of Baghdad tonight, including several government buildings and palaces built by Saddam Hussein, as waves of fresh ground forces swarmed into Iraq from the south.

The troops crossing the border from Kuwait to Iraq followed rapidly advancing armies whose vanguard of tanks had penetrated as much as 100 miles northward, about a third of the way to the capital, Baghdad.

Troops fanned out across southern Iraq to seize a port, strategic oil fields and refineries on an eastern flank near the city of Basra. To the west, Army and Marine units took control of air bases and cleared a wide path through the desert for the expected assault on Baghdad. [Map, Page B14.]

Two marines were killed in fighting today, one in a night of skirmishing to take the port of Umm Qasr and the other during a firefight at the Rumaila oil field. Their deaths followed the loss of four other marines and eight British marines in an early morning helicopter crash.
[Early Saturday morning, two British Navy helicopters collided over international waters in the Persian Gulf, and seven crew members were missing, a British military spokesman told The Associated Press.

[The collision did not result from enemy fire, and a search and rescue operation was under way to find the missing crew members, the spokesman said.]

Tonight, Army officials said the commander and vice commander of Iraq's 51st Mechanized Division, which guards the approach to Basra, had surrendered to a military police company. Later, most of the division's soldiers also surrendered or fled, officials said.

In the first significant surrender of Iraqi forces, 600 soldiers gave themselves up in fighting in the south, many of them around Umm Qasr and on the adjacent Fao peninsula, both now in allied hands. The Iraqi armed forces number about 350,000.

But mass surrenders like those that followed the Iraqi military collapse in Kuwait in 1991 have not yet occurred this time, though American military officials said, without giving details, that they saw many signs of breakdown in the Iraqi command.
In general, it was only weak units of the Iraqi Army that remained in the southern part of the country, and American and British forces are expected to meet far stiffer resistance as they move north toward Baghdad.

In the north of Iraq, in the area controlled by Kurds, Turkey sent between 1,000 and 1,500 soldiers across the border today after Abdullah Gul, the Turkish foreign minister, said the troops were needed to control refugee flows.

There is deep concern in Turkey that the Kurds might seek to carve out an independent Kurdistan in the shadow of the war, but the incursion seemed certain to incense the Kurds.

In the west of Iraq, allied Special Operations Forces seized two air bases that are to be used to ferry conventional and special forces into the area and apply pressure on Baghdad from the west, military officials said.

A New York Times reporter who crossed into Iraq from Kuwait today witnessed American marines ripping down images of Saddam Hussein in the border town of Safwan, as jubilant residents greeted them.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, speaking at a news conference at the Pentagon, said American and British forces had captured or controlled ''a growing portion'' of Iraq.

''The regime is starting to lose control of their country,'' he said. ''The confusion of Iraqi officials is growing. Their ability to see what is happening on the battlefield, to communicate with their forces and to control their country, is slipping away.''
Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said, ''Basically, we are on our plan and moving toward Baghdad, but there are still many unknowns.''

Among them was how Iraq was still able to fire missiles into Kuwait -- as it did three times today, with little effect -- and how it was able to maintain control over a state television apparatus that some American officials predicted would be quickly disabled. That is an important strategic aim because it would ensure that Mr. Hussein's image, and the fear it instills, was kept off the air.

One of the biggest unknowns was whether early success by American and British forces in the largely undefended south would be followed a more sober military reckoning in confrontations with at least six elite Iraqi divisions that ring Baghdad.

Other questions were whether Mr. Hussein was still in charge, whether he still commanded the loyalty of his army and whether he controlled enough force, or weapons of mass destruction, to surprise the armies closing in on him.

Iraq's minister of information threatened today to treat American prisoners of war as ''war criminals.''

''I tell the American soldiers,'' said the minister, Muhammad Saeed al-Sahaf, ''it is better for you to surrender. We will cut off all your heads.''

The bombing that pounded Baghdad tonight with hundreds of fiery explosions, throwing up plumes of smoke and ash, was p
In this way, the allies would avoid a costly battle to subdue the hardened divisions defending Baghdad.

The air battle was most visible in the capital, but military officials said it was only the beginning of an unfolding campaign that in the first 24 hours was expected to hit 1,500 targets all across Iraq.

The new Army airborne and marine units that crossed into Iraq today had specific missions to attack Iraqi command facilities around the southern town of Nasiriya as a prelude for attacks farther north along the Tigris and Euphrates.

Aside from the two air bases captured in western Iraq, American Special Operations Forces operating with Kurdish forces also captured an air base in northern Iraq, military officials said.

Exasperated by Turkey's refusal to consider allowing American troops through its territory into northern Iraq, the Pentagon has decided to divert about 40 ships carrying heavy tanks and combat equipment for the Army's Fourth Infantry Division to Kuwait from the eastern Mediterranean, two military officials said today. The ships, which have been waiting off the Turkish coast for weeks to unload their cargo, will probably begin moving toward the gulf in the next few days.

Once the ships pass through the Suez Canal, it will take about 11 days to reach Kuwait, Navy officials said. The Fourth Division's troops are still at Fort Hood, Tex.

At 2 p.m. today, about 5,000 marines of Task Force Tarawa crossed the Iraqi border from Kuwait and headed north. Tonight, convoys of troops from the 101st Airborne Division were moving across the same border.
Their mission in the coming days is to set up bases for deep assaults by helicopter gunships on the Iraqi Republican Guard forces around Baghdad.

As military officials reported rapid gains on the eastern front near Basra, with more Iraqi troops surrendering by the hour, it seemed possible that British and American marines might soon be able to capture the city.

But a British military official said that the ancient port, with a population of more than one million, was not a military objective and that ''we're really looking at the reaction of the people before we go in there.''

The taking of Umm Qasr was critical to the Basra campaign as allied officials are planning a huge inflow of relief aid to Basra.

As the troops advanced toward Basra, Sir Michael Boyce, the British chief of staff, said in London that there was ''a lot of evidence of large-scale capitulation, evidenced by abandoned positions and items of equipment.''

At the Pentagon today, Mr. Rumsfeld said that ''discussions have intensified'' between coalition forces and Iraqi military units over possible surrender. Senior administration officials said tonight that those talks had seemed promising late Thursday, and had led to hopes that significant units in the Republican Guard, Mr. Hussein's most loyal troops, would begin to peel away from him.

But the talks bogged down early today. That was when Mr. Rumsfeld decided to move forward with the planned bombing of specific sites in Baghdad. ''We had to show these guys that we were serious, and one way or another Baghdad will fall,'' one official said.
Late today, the Defense Department announced the identities of four United States marines killed in the crash of the CH-46E helicopter: Maj. Jay Thomas Aubin, 36, of Waterville, Me.; Capt. Ryan Anthony Beaupre, 30, of Bloomington, Ill.; Cpl. Brian Matthew Kennedy, 25, of Houston; and Staff Sgt. Kendall Damon Watersbey, 29, of Baltimore.

As the scenes of the bombing of Baghdad appeared on television screens around the world, Mr. Rumsfeld bristled at suggestions that American forces had engaged in an indiscriminate fire bombing reminiscent of the consuming attack on Dresden, Germany, in 1945.

''There is no comparison'' to the indiscriminate bombing tactics of previous wars, he said, adding, ''The weapons that are being used today have a degree of precision that no one ever dreamt of in a prior conflict.''
