THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT; Bush Presses U.N. to Act Quickly on Disarming Iraq
By David E. Sanger and Elisabeth Bumiller
Sept. 13, 2002


President Bush challenged the United Nations today to force Saddam Hussein to disarm and end torture and repression of his people, saying that if Iraq continued its defiance of international resolutions, ''action will be unavoidable.''

In a forceful, blunt address at the General Assembly, Mr. Bush told world leaders that the United States was determined, and invited them to take the same firm stand. He argued that President Hussein had ignored 11 years of United Nations resolutions ordering him to destroy his weapons of mass destruction, to cease supporting terrorism, to account for prisoners from the Persian Gulf war and to end a pattern of repression.

Mr. Bush's aides said the president had instructed Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to begin work on a plan of action through the 15-member Security Council, but they made it clear that the United Nations had to act within weeks.

Mr. Bush did not threaten war, but that was his clear implication. ''The just demands of peace and security will be met, or action will be unavoidable,'' he said. ''And a regime that has lost its legitimacy will also lose its power.''
Gen. Tommy R. Franks, leader of the Pentagon's Central Command, briefed the president last week on the latest concept for an American offensive against Iraq, a senior administration official said today, meaning that even while Mr. Bush was pressing for a diplomatic solution, he was continuing to refine his options for an attack.

''Saddam Hussein's regime is a grave and gathering danger,'' Mr. Bush said in his half-hour address, continuing to talk even as a red light on the podium flashed on to indicate that his time had long expired. ''To suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of millions and the peace of the world in a reckless gamble.'' [Transcript, Page A10.]

Foreign leaders and delegates applauded politely and expressed relief that the president had turned to the United Nations for another Security Council resolution to press his case against Iraq. But some said they were concerned that the world body would, in effect, be used to oust the leader of a member nation. [Page A11.]

Mr. Bush also announced that the United States would rejoin Unesco, the United Nations organization that promotes cultural exchanges, after an absence of 18 years.

In his speech, the president turned his campaign in a new direction, making no mention of Osama bin Laden or of nations his administration has identified as threats, like Iran and North Korea. He made only a passing reference to Al Qaeda.
He never mentioned resuming weapons inspections in Iraq, a step Vice President Dick Cheney said last month would be ''dangerous'' and would provide ''false comfort.'' His aides, however, told reporters that the United States would not oppose inspections as long as they occurred in the next few months, without interference from Iraq, and as long as they resulted in the immediate destruction of Mr. Hussein's stocks of chemical and biological weapons and nuclear installations.

Mr. Bush said that in facing down Iraq, the United Nations' relevance was at stake, suggesting that it would become a toothless institution if it failed to enforce its mandates.

''In one place and in one regime we find all these dangers in their most lethal and aggressive forms, exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations was born to confront,'' he said.

Yet he also made clear that the United States would act alone if the United Nations hesitated. One of his senior aides said this time ''there will be no negotiation with Saddam Hussein.''

Mr. Bush pursued his case throughout the day and evening, including at a reception tonight for visiting leaders held in the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center, on the edge of Ground Zero. The seven-story-deep pit where the World Trade Center once stood was a stark backdrop, and a reminder of his warning earlier in the day that if Iraq's weapons of mass destruction fell into the hands of terrorists, ''the attacks of Sept. 11 would be a prelude to far greater horrors.''

Traversing the East Side under security made even tighter by the high alert issued by the government on Tuesday, Mr. Bush pressed his case against Iraq with the leaders of India, Pakistan, Japan and the new government of Afghanistan. But he also had other themes, including defusing the Kashmir crisis, energizing a stalled economic reform program in Tokyo and routing returning Qaeda fighters in the Afghan provinces.

The White House had promoted today's speech as an indictment of a decade of Iraqi crimes, and one of the most important moments in Mr. Bush's 20-month-old presidency. He used prosecutorial language that is rarely heard in the General Assembly, and he went to great lengths to paint a vivid portrait of Mr. Hussein as an enemy of civilization.
''Tens of thousands of political opponents and ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by beating and burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation and rape,'' he said. ''Wives are tortured in front of their husbands, children in the presence of their parents -- and all of these horrors concealed from the world by the apparatus of a totalitarian state.''

He added, ''He blames the suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for himself, and to buy arms for his country.''

Mr. Bush referred obliquely to an assassination attempt against his father, the former President Bush, after he left office, saying, ''In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the emir of Kuwait and a former American president.'' A senior aide told reporters, ''Obviously, one doesn't want to appear to personalize this.''

Simultaneously, the White House released a 22-page document titled ''A Decade of Deception and Defiance,'' which lists Mr. Hussein's efforts to avoid inspections and to import banned equipment for making nuclear and biological weapons, and work on missiles that Iraq agreed not to conduct as part of the cease-fire that ended the gulf war in 1991.

But for all the anti-Hussein language, the administration was deliberately vague about exactly what it wanted the United Nations to do next, and how fast. Officials acknowledged that the United States did not want to be seen as prescribing a specific course of action, for fear of the usual charges that Washington was dictating its terms to the international community.

Tonight, a senior official involved in the continuing negotiations here said, ''What we are looking for is a resolution that, at least initially, makes clear that Iraq is in violation, that Iraq has to do something about that, and makes clear that if it doesn't, there will be consequences.''

But, the official continued, ''exactly how those elements are going to be worded, that's what we have to work out in consultation.''
Secretary Powell is to pursue that issue on Friday at a lunch with the permanent members of the Security Council and in other consultations.

Mr. Bush met before his speech with Secretary General Kofi Annan and told him, according to an aide, that ''we want to make sure that the United Nations does not turn into a League of Nations.'' Mr. Bush, who used the same phrasing in his speech, was referring to the organization that was formed after World War I, without American participation, and collapsed in 1940, largely for having failed to confront Hitler.

Mr. Annan has been openly critical of what he sees as Mr. Bush's rush to action against Iraq, and at the meeting this morning, the two leaders posed stiffly for pictures until Mr. Annan said quietly to the president, ''Let's shake.'' Although Mr. Annan delivered an address before the president's today that warned strongly against unilateral action, he also said the United Nations had to act.

''If Iraq's defiance continues, the Security Council must face its responsibilities,'' Mr. Annan said.

Today's meeting with President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan required a particularly delicate dance: Mr. Bush had to find a way to chastise General Musharraf for his decision to amend the country's Constitution to perpetuate his own rule.

Mr. Bush began the meeting, an administration official said, by telling General Musharraf, ''Adherence to democracy is key.'' But he was vague, and when pressed, administration officials said there had been no talk of penalizing Pakistan for its retreat from democratic reforms.

Pakistan has also refused international inspection of its nuclear installations, and American officials have made no secret of the fact that they are worried about whether Islamic radicals in its military or intelligence service could gain control of nuclear weapons. Asked today whether the administration was setting a double standard -- one for Pakistan, another for Iraq -- a senior official said, ''Iraq is an outlaw regime.''

Later in the day, Mr. Bush met with President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan, and the United States announced an $80 million contribution to a $180 million project to build a new road in Afghanistan.+
