THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; POWELL SAYS IRAQ RAISES RISK OF WAR BY LYING ON ARMS
By Steven R. Weisman With Julia Preston
Dec. 20, 2002


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, citing a new assertion by United Nations inspectors that Iraq has failed to disclose information about its illegal weapons, said today that Saddam Hussein's government was in ''material breach'' of Security Council resolutions and ''well on its way to losing this last chance'' to avoid a war.

In one of the toughest warnings to Mr. Hussein since United Nations inspectors arrived in Baghdad to search for evidence of chemical, biological and nuclear arms, Mr. Powell also said Iraq needed to comply on disclosure within weeks rather than months. [Excerpts, Page A18.]

In the 12,200 pages of documents it released on Dec. 7, Iraq continues its ''pattern of noncooperation, its pattern of deception, its pattern of dissembling, its pattern of lying,'' Mr. Powell said. ''If that is going to be the way they continue through the weeks ahead, then we're not going to find a peaceful solution to this problem.''

At the United Nations, both the chiefs of the weapons inspection teams and France, a veto-bearing permanent member of the Security Council, appeared to lend crucial international support to the United States' assessment that Iraq had let the world down once more.
Hans Blix, the chief of the chemical and biological weapons inspection teams, said that ''an opportunity was missed'' by Baghdad to come clean about new arms programs and that making a full disclosure would have been better for Iraq. Mr. Blix told the Council in a closed briefing that there were ''inaccuracies'' in Iraq's claim that it destroyed a huge stockpile of anthrax it built up from 1988 to 1991. It was the first time the inspectors suggested that Iraq had lied. [Excerpts, Page A16.]

Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, chief of the nuclear inspectors, agreed that Iraq was ''cooperating well'' in terms of allowing inspectors access to sites.

But Mr. Blix, speaking for all the United Nations inspectors, said, ''The absence of evidence means, of course, that one cannot have confidence that there do not remain weapons of mass destruction.''

Mr. Powell's blunt words came as President Bush met with Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of American forces in the Middle East, to discuss plans for moving more troops and equipment to the Persian Gulf. The Pentagon has already been given approval for an additional 50,000 troops in the region, doubling the number there now.

In addition, American and Turkish officials met today to work out the details of site surveys to be conducted by the United States at 10 to 15 bases and ports in Turkey in the next several days, a senior military official said.
Military officials said the changes would allow Mr. Bush to begin an offensive if necessary by late January.

Administration officials said this evening that tough talk from Mr. Powell and disclosures of troop plans were all part of a calculated move to increase pressure on Mr. Hussein, as well as on dissidents who might cooperate with weapons inspectors or even on those who might be willing to oust him.

''We're stepping up everything, including military preparations, to send Iraq a message,'' an administration official said. ''The pressure is going to be built up even more.''

Mr. Powell's unusually explicit talk of the possibility of force was seen in Washington and at the United Nations as notable for coming from the figure considered the most reluctant of those around Mr. Bush to go to war. Mr. Powell is also known as the administration's principal advocate for seeking United Nations support before military force is used.

The United States ambassador to the United Nations, John D. Negroponte, expressed the American reaction there today, calling the declaration ''an insult to our intelligence and indeed an insult to this Council.''

Among those providing support for the American reaction was France, which up to now has been especially eager to avoid war by forcing Iraq to disarm through the inspections.

Today it publicly criticized the declaration as incomplete and full of inconsistencies, although it stopped short of saying the document was in breach of resolutions.
Over all, the negative reaction to the Iraqi declaration was an early vindication of the administration's strategy: allowing Mr. Hussein to show by his own actions that he will not give up his secret weapons peacefully.

Most members of the Council, including the United States, insisted that the failings of Iraq's arms declaration made it urgent to support the weapons inspectors in their search for evidence in Iraq.

At the same time, pressure increased sharply on Washington to share with the inspectors secret intelligence about Iraq's arms programs that the administration so far has withheld from the inspectors in order to use for its denunciations of Mr. Hussein.

Mr. Negroponte pledged to the Council and the inspectors today that Washington would open the flow of intelligence data.

At the request of the United States and several other nations, the inspectors agreed to brief the Council more frequently in January than was previously scheduled. The change of plan will give Washington more opportunities in coming weeks to judge whether Iraq is continuing to try to foil the inspections.

At the State Department, Mr. Powell discussed the specific nature of what Iraq had failed to disclose; a two-page list of omissions was distributed.

Amplifying an assertion by Mr. Blix about the existence of an anthrax stockpile, Mr. Powell said that records dating from the 1990's inspections showed that Iraq could have produced 27,500 quarts of anthrax. The Iraqi declaration, he pointed out, is ''silent on this stockpile, which alone would be enough to kill several million people.''
Mr. Powell also said that although Iraq had earlier admitted manufacturing about 20,000 quarts of botulinum toxin, a biological agent, its declaration showed these and other potential supplies to be missing. Also missing from the declaration were known stockpiles of precursors of poison gas.

In the nuclear sphere, he said that based on unspecified intelligence since 1998, when United Nations inspectors left Iraq, it was known to have built mobile biological weapons productions units, and to have tried to obtain aluminum tubes for the enrichment of uranium for nuclear weapons. These efforts, too, remain undisclosed by Iraq.

The failure to provide details about these programs, Mr. Powell said, ''has brought it closer to the day when it will have to face'' the consequences outlined in the United Nations Security Council resolution approved in November.

''The world will not wait forever,'' he said, adding that until Iraq fully cooperates with the United Nations, ''we should be very skeptical and, I'm afraid, we should be very discouraged with respect to the prospects for finding a peaceful solution.''

Administration officials had criticized Iraq's disclosure of its weapons programs almost immediately after it was issued less than two weeks ago. In fact, few officials or experts expected Iraq to disclose much, so their dissatisfaction was mixed with a feeling of vindication on that score.

In the early 1990's, it took months, even years, for inspectors to pry information from Iraq about its biological and chemical weapons. Today Mr. Powell made it clear that the latest process would not be allowed to drag out that long.

The next target date for decisions on Iraq, some administration officials said, is Jan. 27. That is the date that Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei are to make their first full report on their inspections. Not coincidentally, some officials say it is approximately the time when the military would be ready to attack.
There had been a debate in the administration over whether to label the latest Iraqi failure a ''material breach.'' In the end, Mr. Powell and Mr. Negroponte both used that term today.

It was significant because the word ''breach'' applies to Iraq's obligations to disarm under the cease-fire of 1991. Determination of an Iraqi breach would effectively permit a return to military force by the United States and its allies.

Yet, although he used the term, Mr. Powell made it clear that a number of steps needed to be taken before war would be considered.

First, he called for a further effort to ''audit and examine'' the Iraqi declaration of Dec. 7 and an accelerated effort to interview Iraqi scientists and other experts ''outside Iraq, where they can speak freely.'' He said any Iraqi effort to block such interviews would be considered another material breach.

The secretary said inspectors should also ''intensify their efforts'' in Iraq, even though some officials say that without Iraqi cooperation or help from scientists, the odds of their finding solid evidence of arms programs are not large.

While saying the United States would take steps to share with inspectors its information on weapons and weapons sites, Mr. Powell was vague about them -- deliberately so, officials said. The United States could provide highly sensitive intelligence information, and possibly help from agents inside Iraq to spirit cooperating scientists out of the country along with the families.

Mr. Blix has expressed reservations about such interviews, especially if they are conducted outside the country, saying that he would not go along with ''abductions.''