THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT'S SPEECH; Bush Sees 'Urgent Duty' to Pre-empt Attack by Iraq
By David E. Sanger
Oct. 8, 2002


President Bush declared tonight that Saddam Hussein could attack the United States or its allies ''on any given day'' with chemical or biological weapons. In a forceful argument for disarming Iraq or going to war with that country, he argued that ''we have an urgent duty to prevent the worst from occurring.''

Mr. Bush, in a half-hour indictment of Mr. Hussein delivered before an audience of 400 here and millions around the country and the world, insisted that leading a campaign to disarm the Iraqi leader would not detract from the war against terrorism. ''To the contrary,'' he said, ''confronting the threat posed by Iraq is crucial to winning the war on terror.'' [Transcript, Page A12.]

The president likened the threat the country faces today from Iraq to the Cuban missile crisis, which unfolded exactly 40 years ago this month. The comparison was intended, his aides acknowledged, to give the confrontation a sense of urgency and to explain why the United States could wait only weeks or months to disarm the Iraqi leader.

Building his case, the president charged for the first time that Iraq's fleet of unmanned aerial vehicles was ultimately intended to deliver chemical and biological weapons to cities in the United States. The president also built a lengthy, if circumstantial, case that Mr. Hussein had extensive ties to the Al Qaeda terrorist organization and that Iraq trained members of the terrorist group in ''bomb-making, poisons and deadly gases.'' Although other members of his administration had cited evidence tying Al Qaeda to Iraq, Mr. Bush spoke about this in detail for the first time tonight.
He called Mr. Hussein a dictator, ''a student of Stalin'' and a murderer, and most important described no solution other than Mr. Hussein's permanent removal from office that would end the confrontation.

''I hope that this will not require military action, but it may,'' he said, warning America that Mr. Hussein could attempt ''cruel and desperate measures'' in response. He warned Iraq's generals to ignore any orders to use weapons of mass destruction or be treated as war criminals.

Mr. Bush did not declare war tonight, but he was clearly preparing the country for the likelihood that war would be the only course left if Iraq refused to disarm. He insisted that doing nothing ''is the riskiest of all options,'' and quoted John F. Kennedy's words during the missile crisis at length to underscore his point that it would be foolish to wait for a determined American enemy to strike first.

''Facing clear evidence or peril, we cannot wait for the final proof -- the smoking gun -- that could come in the form of a mushroom cloud.'' He continued, ''Understanding the threats of our time, knowing the designs and deceptions of the Iraqi regime, we have every reason to assume the worst, and we have an urgent duty to prevent the worst from occurring.''

Tonight, after Mr. Bush spoke, the White House released spy satellite photographs showing how extensively a crucial Iraqi nuclear facility had been rebuilt since the United States bombed it in 1998. The pictures were reminiscent of President Kennedy's decision to show photographs of Soviet missiles in Cuba, though Mr. Bush's pictures revealed only buildings, not weapons.
The White House carefully chose the site of tonight's speech: the restored Union Terminal here. The hall was filled with a cheering crowd that interrupted Mr. Bush twice, and the president described the decisions ahead in the stark terms of the terminal's heyday in World War II.

While the arguments he offered tonight were largely familiar, he gathered those arguments into one speech, seeking to answer those who argue that the threat is not that urgent and that a war now will destabilize the Middle East and distract from the war on terrorism. Methodically, he rejected those contentions. But the heart of his argument was that ''the threat from Iraq stands alone because it gathers the most serious dangers of our age in one place.''

He spoke at a critical moment in the national debate over Iraq, just as Congress is poised to vote this week on a resolution authorizing military action, and as the United Nations Security Council is entering the final throes of an intense internal struggle over how to confront Baghdad. Once again Mr. Bush described this as a struggle for the true identity of the United Nations, and made it clear that if it failed to disarm Iraq, he would, with the help of a coalition of nations that he never named.

Mr. Bush said, as he has often in recent times, that his argument is with Mr. Hussein and his supporters, but not with the Iraqi people. ''America is a friend to the people of Iraq,'' he said. ''Our demands are directed only at the regime that enslaves them and threatens us.'' He drew a picture of a free Iraq, in which ''the oppression of Kurds, Assyrians, Turkomans, Shiites Sunnis and others will be lifted.''

He never described how long the United States would be willing to occupy Iraq or hold together a country that has long been divided by rival tribes and rival religions, and where the riches will go to those who sit atop Iraq's oilfields. But he spoke of maintaining a ''unified Iraq,'' and said ''if military action is necessary, the United States and our allies will help the Iraqi people rebuild their economy and create the institutions of liberty.''

In what appeared to be an effort to end the debate over the administration's real goals of disarming Iraq or removing Mr. Hussein from power, Mr. Bush said one could not come without the other. And he answered critics who believe, he said, that removing Mr. Hussein could ''make the situation worse.''

''The situation could hardly get worse,'' he said simply.

In some respects, the speech was notable for what it did not say. There was no warning to Israel to stay out of the conflict with Iraq, even if it is attacked. There was no explanation of why Mr. Hussein has not used his biological and chemical weapons against the United States or its allies, even though it has possessed them for years. There were no comparisons to the other nations Mr. Bush has called members of an ''axis of evil,'' North Korea and Iran, both of which are believed to be pursuing nuclear weapons programs.
He also added a new demand to Iraq, one he never mentioned in his speech to the United Nations on Sept. 12. In addition to inspections and disarmament, he said, Mr. Hussein must allow ''witnesses to its illegal activities to be interviewed outside of the country,'' and to take their families with them, so that Mr. Hussein cannot hold them hostage.

He argued that it was impossible to know with any certainty how close Mr. Hussein was to developing a nuclear weapon. But it did not matter, he said, because American intelligence shows that Mr. Hussein is reconstituting his nuclear weapons program with ''a group he calls his nuclear mujahideen, his nuclear holy warriors.'' He said that a softball-sized amount of fissile material would be sufficient to make Iraq a nuclear power in less than a year, and ''if we allow that to happen, a terrible line would be crossed.''

Mr. Bush's speech caps a week-long effort to sell his case against Saddam Hussein. His first audience, Congress, requires the least persuasion. Both houses of Congress are expected to give the president discretion to attack Iraq when they vote, probably by the end of the week.

Over the weekend, even the Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, an early skeptic of granting Mr. Bush so much latitude to decide when and how to commit the military, conceded that Mr. Bush would get the broad authority he has sought.

Just a month ago, it seemed highly doubtful Mr. Bush would get that kind of backing. In August the critics of committing the military to disarming and dislodging Mr. Hussein seemed to dominate the debate, led by prominent Republicans and generals who conducted the war in the Persian Gulf. But starting with his speech to the United Nations on Sept. 12, Mr. Bush began to win converts, and the White House quite skillfully used a 1998 Congressional vote calling for regime change in Iraq to make the case that Mr. Hussein has only grown more threatening.

''The strategy,'' one White House official said in recent days, ''is to use the Congress as leverage, leverage to bring around the public, and leverage to make it clear to the U.N. that it's not only George Bush who is prepared to draw a line in the sand, it's the whole country.''

His second audience, the American public, has been more problematic. A New York Times/CBS News poll published today showed strong support for confronting Iraq. But Americans indicated that they wanted allies and wanted the United Nations inspection process to proceed before military action was taken.