A NATION AT WAR: COMBAT; 2 U.S. Columns Are Advancing on Baghdad Defenses
By Patrick E. Tyler
April 1, 2003

American forces leading the drive north to Baghdad battled their way today into a town 50 miles south of the capital, capturing Iraqi troops and regaining some momentum in a war that has proved more complex than expected.

An armored unit of the Third Infantry Division rolled into Hindiya, population 80,000, at dawn, firing from tanks and Bradley fighting vehicles as they crossed a bridge on the Euphrates River and confronted stiff Iraqi resistance.

At least 20 Iraqi soldiers were killed, and some members of Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard were captured.

At the same time, units of the First Marine Division, advancing more rapidly than in recent days, reached Hilla, 15 miles to the east. ''We've made that clear: Where the regime is, we're coming,'' said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks, the deputy director of operations for the United States Central Command.
But problems persisted in the rear. In a day of gun battles and tank assaults all along the Euphrates, an American soldier from the 101st Airborne Division was killed in fighting at Najaf, about 100 miles south of Baghdad. [Map, Page B16.]

Two brigades of the 101st Airborne skirmished through the day with fedayeen irregulars firing weapons mounted on pickup trucks, and dozens of Iraqis were killed in the exchanges, military officials said.

This afternoon, at a checkpoint in Najaf near where four soldiers were killed in a car bomb attack on Saturday, American troops manning a similar checkpoint opened fire on a civilian vehicle that refused their order to halt and ignored warning shots.

When the vehicle came to a halt, seven women and children were found dead inside from the gunfire. Two others were wounded, and four were unharmed, Army officials said. An investigation is under way.

The incident appeared to illustrate the difficulties of fighting Iraqi forces that have proved willing to mingle with civilians, a problem that seems likely to persist. But American commanders today insisted that their focus remained on Baghdad.
Tonight, a senior officer at the Central Command in Qatar said the United States was prepared to pay a ''very high price'' in casualties to capture Baghdad and topple President Hussein.

''We're prepared to pay a very high price because we are not going to do anything other than ensure that this regime goes away,'' the officer told reporters. ''If that means there will be a lot of casualties, then there will be a lot of casualties.''

In a speech to Coast Guard personnel at the port of Philadelphia, President Bush said: ''Many dangers lie ahead, but day by day we are moving closer to Baghdad. Day by day, we are moving closer to victory.''

As air and ground forces attacked the Republican Guard divisions around Baghdad, the United States' second-ranking officer said there were no signs that Mr. Hussein or his top aides were directing their troops.

The officer, Gen. Peter Pace, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said, ''We watch the actions of the units, the Iraqi units on the battlefield, as we pay attention to our intelligence systems, that there is no evidence that there is senior leadership giving guidance to the field, and there's no evidence of coordinated actions on the battlefield by the various units.''

''So they are getting destroyed in place without much leadership from above,'' he said tonight on the PBS program ''The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer.''

A senior Pentagon official said the fighting ability of two Republican Guard divisions south of Baghdad -- the Medina and the Baghdad -- had been reduced by half. He also said two other Republican Guard divisions -- the Hammurabi and the Nebuchadnezzar, which were trying to reinforce the battered units -- were being pounded by coalition bombers.
It is somewhere on the landscape between the American forces spearheading the thrust northward and Baghdad that American commanders expect what is left of the Republican Guard to make a stand in front of the capital.

Army officers said tonight that the expected clash with the Medina Division south of Baghdad would be the most important engagement thus far in the war.

The Medina division has been subjected to intense bombardment from the air for the last week.

The Army officers believe that the battle could begin as soon as Tuesday if the Soviet-made T-72 tanks of the front-line Iraqi forces move south to challenge the advance of the M1A1 Abrams tanks leading the Third Infantry Division north.

''We're going to continue to work against the Republican Guard forces that are defending Baghdad,'' General Brooks said today.

American forces near the front line were on high alert today for a chemical weapons attack because intelligence officers say they believe that Iraqi commanders are under orders to thwart a breakthrough that could bring the American Army to the outskirts of Baghdad.

The inadvertent shooting of women and children today was the worst of several mistaken attacks on civilians in the last week, as American forces tried to cope with a battlefield on which Iraqi irregulars have attacked in civilian clothes from taxi cabs, pickup trucks and minivans.

Last weekend, Brig. Gen. John Kelly, deputy commander of the First Marine Division, said one of his machine gunners had sprayed fire along a line of jitney buses carrying fedayeen gunners attacking Marine positions.
''He did exactly what he should have done,'' General Kelly said. ''He fired them up and killed them all. But when he got to the bus, there were some civilians on the bus that were dead.''

The toll on civilians continued today.

General Brooks said Iraqi irregular forces near Karbala trying to get across a bridge that they had rigged for demolition had pushed ''women and children in front of them'' to shield their advance.

''One woman tried to break contact and escape, and as she ran, she was shot in the back and thrown into the river,'' he said.

On the contested bridge in Hindiya, the captured town south of Baghdad, an American company commander, Capt. Chris Carter of Watkinsville, Ga., dashed to a wounded Iraqi woman in a black chador lying exposed to fire in the center of the span. Captain Carter crouched with his M-16 rifle to cover her position until medics could evacuate her by stretcher, according to journalists traveling with the unit.

The Associated Press reported that American forces had entered the Baath Party office in Hindiya. Inside, they found tens of thousands of rounds of small-arms ammunition, as well as hundreds of mortars and many heavy machine guns. Loyalists of Mr. Hussein's Baath Party have appeared to lead resistance against the allied advance in several southern towns.

As the tanks of the Third Infantry Division's Second Brigade reached Hindiya, a senior American officer at headquarters in Qatar said a battalion commander of the Nebuchadnezzar Division was captured during today's fighting.

That appeared to indicate that the Iraqi military command was pulling reinforcements from a Republican Guard division deployed north of Baghdad to reinforce the southern approach to the capital.
''I think it is significant,'' the senior officer said of the capture of the northern battalion commander.

He told reporters that it meant either that the Iraqis were preparing a ''thicker defense'' south of Baghdad or that ''things are so bad in the south that they had to bring this valuable division south to stiffen the defense.''

In Baghdad, an allied bomber staged a daylight strike at low altitude on a palace used by Mr. Hussein's younger son, Qusay, who controls the presidential security force that protects the Iraqi leader. Qusay was appointed this month as the commander of forces protecting the capital.

At the same time, a Marine force raided the southern Iraqi town of Shatra, where the headquarters of Mr. Hussein's southern commander, Ali Hassan al-Majid, was said to be situated.

Mr. Majid, known as ''Chemical Ali,'' has been accused of war crimes for his role in directing a campaign of chemical weapons attacks against Iraqi Kurds in the final stages of the Iran-Iraq war of 1980-88.

In southern Iraq, the battle for the Basra region inched forward as a British force of 600 Royal Marines seized the town of Abul Khasib southeast of the city, cutting the road leading from the city to the Fao peninsula.

On Basra's western side, a battalion of the Black Watch, one of the British Army's most famous regiments, took control of the center of Zubayr, a major suburb where a Baath Party headquarters was destroyed last week and one of its top officials was taken prisoner.
On the northern front, bombing raids were reported near Mosul, about 250 miles north of Baghdad.

Kurdish leaders produced two of five Iraqi soldiers who surrendered on Monday after three days of heavy American bombardment of their bunkers near the village of Kalak.

In interviews, the soldiers said that more Iraqis would surrender but that they feared execution squads made up of Baath Party members and intelligence officials.

''There were execution teams just behind the soldiers,'' one of the prisoners said, ''to prevent them from fleeing their posts.''
