THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; 3 MEMBERS OF NATO AND RUSSIA RESIST U.S. ON IRAQ PLANS
By Craig S. Smith With Richard Bernstein
Feb. 11, 2003

France and Germany closed ranks against the United States today, blocking attempts by NATO to begin military planning for a conflict with Iraq and issuing a joint declaration with Russia calling for intensified weapons inspections as an alternative to war.

In a statement issued here, Russia, Germany and France called for a ''substantial strengthening'' of the ''human and technical capabilites'' of the weapons inspectors in Iraq, arguing that the inspections should continue in more vigorous form before war is contemplated.

At the same time, in Brussels, France, Germany and Belgium blocked an effort by other NATO members led by the United States to begin military planning for the defense of Turkey in the event of war with Iraq.

In response, Turkey took the highly unusual step of invoking Article IV of the NATO treaty, which requires the entire alliance to consult if any member feels its security is threatened. A further NATO meeting was called for Tuesday.
The move by the three NATO members most reluctant to use military force against Iraq marked one of the most serious cleavages in the history of the alliance and was sharply criticized by some members as a blow to the strength and credibility of the organization at the core of trans-Atlantic cooperation.

''I am disappointed that France would block NATO from helping a country like Turkey prepare,'' President Bush said. ''I think it affects the alliance in a negative way.'' Nicholas Burns, the American ambassador to NATO, said the organization now faced a ''crisis of credibility.''

Ever since the United States began serious preparations for a possible war to oust Saddam Hussein, tensions with several European states have sharpened. But the developments today -- defiance of America at NATO and criticism of America from Moscow to Paris -- appeared to crystallize the differences.

At the United Nations today, Iraq delivered a letter to the chief United Nations weapons inspectors agreeing to allow flights over the country by photographic surveillance aircraft, according to Mohammed Aldouri, the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations. The issue originally arose when Iraq denied permission for U-2 flights.

Iraq also promised to move swiftly to adopt national legislation banning all weapons of mass destruction, Mr. Aldouri said.
The statement issued in Paris at the end of a visit by the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, said: ''Russia, Germany and France note that the position they express coincides with that of a large number of countries, within the Security Council in particular.''

The declaration appeared to be a veiled warning to the United States that the three could block any American attempt to pass a second Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq. The unusual stand against the United States by two of America's closest allies, France and Germany, together with America's erstwhile nemesis, Russia, suggested the extent of the uneasiness that President Bush's war plans have stirred.

All three countries are Security Council members. France and Russia are permanent members with the power to veto resolutions.

The Iraqi concessions today came after the chief weapons inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, held two days of talks in Baghdad over the weekend with top Iraqi officials.

France argued today that further Iraqi concessions could follow. The French ambassador to NATO, Benoit d'Aboville, said in a telephone interview: ''It would be wrong to assume that the U.N. process and the inspections process are at the end of the road. We assume that there is still space for diplomacy and we should use this space, and we don't see any reason NATO should enforce a policy not in line with what we are trying to achieve.''

In effect, France, Belgium and Germany held to the position at the NATO meeting that preparing for the defense of Turkey would amount to accepting the inevitability of war.

Their stance outraged several NATO member states, including the Czech Republic. ''This is a matter of solidarity with a member country,'' said Karel Kovanda, the Czech ambassador to NATO. ''Once you realize what Iraq might do in Turkey, you realize that Turkey has a reason to be worried. And not to take Turkey's worries very seriously raises important questions about the fundamental purpose of the alliance.''
At issue is an American proposal, first presented in December, that would allow the alliance's military commanders to begin making arrangements to dispatch Patriot antimissile batteries and other materiél to Turkey to help it defend against possible attack from Iraq in the event that war begins there.

Mr. Burns, the NATO ambassador, said: ''NATO's facing a serious test of its credibility to an ally, Turkey. Turkey took the unusual and historic step of invoking Article IV of the treaty today and we believe it's incumbent on all allies to meet Turkey's request for assistance.''

But that willingness to help was absent today. ''Welcome to the end of the Atlantic alliance,'' said François Heisbourg, director of France's Foundation for Strategic Research, after Mr. Putin and Mr. Chirac met.

Mr. Heisbourg argued that the rupture between Europe and the United States, however fleeting it may prove, is the inevitable consequence of Washington's increasingly unilateral decision-making.

NATO lost its original raison d'être with the disappearance of the Soviet threat at the end of the cold war. The alliance has expanded to embrace former Soviet bloc countries and has intervened twice in the Balkans in the name of European stability and Western values.

But imbalances have grown. While Europe has relaxed and let its defense spending slip, the United States' military power has continued to grow to the point that even some of its allies have become alarmed.

Lord Robertson, the NATO secretary-general, described the deadlock today as ''very serious'' but played down the long-term significance. It was the timing of aiding Turkey that was at issue rather than the principle, he said. ''We are united in our commitment to the security of all NATO's members.''
But Daniel Nexon, a European specialist teaching at Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service, said of the alliance: ''It's an unstable situation. In an environment where the U.S. has so much dominance you would expect other states to start to counterbalance it and try to check U.S. policy.''

Some analysts believe the United States could emerge more powerful still from the standoff with its allies.

''If they futilely attempt to stop the United States from doing this and the United States is able to do it anyway, what does that say: that the United States is too powerful for them to stop,'' said Robert Kagan, the Brussels-based author of ''Of Paradise and Power: America and Europe in the New World Order.''

He argued that France, together with Germany and Russia, might be able to delay American action and say they were ''the only ones with guts enough to tame the U.S.'' But they risked forcing the United States to act outside of NATO and the United Nations, the only frameworks in which constraints can effectively be put on American power.

The 260-word Russian-German-French declaration reaffirmed their commitment to the disarmament of Iraq ''within the shortest possible'' time but called for the United Nations weapons inspections to continue with ''the substantial strengthening of their human and technical capabilities by all possible means'' within the framework of United Nations Resolution 1441, passed by the Security Council late last year.

It gave no details of how that might be done other than to say that the resolution ''provides a framework whose possibilities have not yet been thoroughly explored.''

Last week, the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, offered to lend the United Nations weapons inspectors Mirage IV spy planes, though the French said it was up to Mr. Blix to request the planes. Mr. de Villepin also suggested tripling the number of inspectors in the country. France is consulting with Germany and Russia over specific initiatives to strengthen inspections under Resolution 1441.
''There is still an alternative to war,'' the declaration read, adding that force should only be used as a last resort. It called on Iraq to ''cooperate actively'' and ''face up to its responsibilities in full.''

The declaration, crafted among the leaders of the three countries over the last two days, said the debate over the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq ''must continue in the spirit of friendship and respect that characterizes our relations with the United States.'' Mr. Chirac added that France was not questioning the solidarity of the trans-Atlantic alliance.

But the French president, responding to reporters' questions after reading the declaration at an Élysée Palace news conference late today, said that having the United States as an ally ''does not exempt us, on a particular matter that calls for a moral approach -- I'm talking here of a possible war with Iraq -- to have an opinion and to defend it.''

He stated flatly that ''nothing today justified a war,'' and said that ''as it stands now, there is not to my knowledge indisputable proof'' that weapons of mass destruction existed in Iraq. Mr. Putin said evidence of Iraq's weapons programs presented to the United Nations last week by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell must be verified by inspectors on the ground.
