THREATS AND RESPONSES: HOLLYWOOD; Actor Follows His Own Script on Iraq and War
By John F. Burns
Dec. 16, 2002


As Sean Penn packed last week for a journey into the politically fraught landscape of Saddam Hussein's Iraq, he said today, he pondered the history of Hollywood actors who had wagered their celebrity in lands locked in enmity with the United States.

Like a lighthouse on jagged rocks, there was the case of Jane Fonda and her Christmas visit to North Vietnam in 1972, when her firebrand condemnation of the American war effort earned her, from troops fighting the Vietcong, the sobriquet of Hanoi Jane. In the 1920's and 1930's, there were the Hollywood actors, writers and directors who visited Stalin's Russia as the Great Terror loomed, and found nothing much to their distaste.

Mr. Penn, a onetime Hollywood bad boy who was rarely known in the earlier stages of his career for his forbearance, arrived here on Friday for a three-day visit after an open letter he addressed to President Bush in October in the form of a $56,000 advertisement in The Washington Post. Speaking of Mr. Bush's threat to invade Iraq, he condemned the president for ''a simplistic and inflammatory view of good and evil.'' He added, ''Sir, I beg you, help save America before yours is a legacy of shame and horror.''

In faxes, open letters and antiwar statements within the last month, he has been joined in his opposition to a war in Iraq by Barbra Streisand, Kim Basinger, Mia Farrow, Martin Sheen, Olympia Dukakis, Susan Sarandon, Tim Robbins, Danny Glover and Ms. Fonda -- and more than 4,000 others, in an advertisement published in The New York Times and the Los Angeles Times.
ADVERTISEMENT
But if Mr. Penn's letter seemed to set the stage for fireworks, the 42-year-old actor worked his way through his days here with a restraint a world away from the edgy, often truculent characters he has played in films from ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High'' to ''Dead Man Walking.''

Iraqi officials who thought giving him a visa would assure a highly publicized reprise of the October salvo -- as has happened when American peace groups have come here and angrily denounced Mr. Bush -- found themselves dealing instead with The Quiet American.

Chain-smoking, self-questioning and insisting he had come to Iraq ''to learn and not to teach,'' the actor shunned television cameras and pursuing reporters until a news conference, and accompanying interviews, he gave a few hours before he left tonight.

Even then, he was a disappointment to anybody expecting him to follow the example of American protesters who, in their zeal to condemn Mr. Bush, have sometimes seemed eager to embrace Mr. Hussein, or at least to ignore some of the less savory aspects of his rule.

Instead, Mr. Penn chose the diplomat's path, sparing both Mr. Bush and Mr. Hussein the full power of the ''conclusions'' he said he had reached in the momentum toward war. ''Can I think of more extreme things to say?'' the actor said, referring to Mr. Hussein's rule, during an interview in a suite in the government-owned Al Rashid Hotel that offered a twinkling nighttime panorama of Baghdad's palaces, party buildings and mosques Mr. Hussein has built in the bulldozed heart of old Baghdad. ''You bet I can.''
He added, ''You come here on a Friday, you leave on a Sunday, and you start throwing out flamboyant and inflammatory messages -- that doesn't seem to be of advantage to anyone.'' Where Iraq is concerned, he said: ''I can read something one day, and the next day I read something else, and I think, 'Oh God, I didn't even think about that,' and that's humbling. So I'm afraid of saying something that might hurt somebody, and then find out I was wrong in the first place.''

He said he thought out the approach intensively before setting out from his San Francisco-area home. He said he had talked with some of ''my peers'' in Hollywood who had been burned by involving themselves in high-profile political disputes. He considered the impassioned climate in America since Sept. 11 and the ''legitimate worries about what we don't know'' about Iraq and its secret weapons programs; and weighed the concerns of his wife, the actress Robin Wright Penn, who, he said, had ''her fingers crossed'' as he left for Baghdad.

He had also reflected, he said, on the bitter experience in the 1950's of his father, the film director and television producer Leo Penn, who was blacklisted by Hollywood studios for five years after refusing to testify during the Communist scare of the McCarthy years. More recently, he said, there had been the experience of directing an 11-minute film that was the American contribution to an 11-nation French-led collaborative film titled ''11.9.01'' that offered differing and often questioning perspectives on the events of Sept. 11 -- only for the film to find no distributor in the United States, nearly three months after its Paris premiere.

But perhaps most of all, Mr. Penn seemed to have thought over what happened to Ms. Fonda. Without mentioning her name, Mr. Penn said in the interview that her experience in Vietnam, and her apology to American veterans' groups more than a quarter of a century later, had been a caution to him. ''I thought, there will clearly be those who will say that coming to Baghdad is insensitive to American troops,'' he said. ''But I don't imagine I'll be apologizing as she did at some far point in the future.''

Mr. Penn's trip here, arranged at short notice, was suggested to him by the Institute for Public Accuracy, an organization founded in San Francisco in 1997 that spends a $350,000 annual budget on offering ''analyses, perceptions and information that rarely make it into the public domain,'' according to the institute's founder and executive director, Norman Solomon. Mr. Solomon, 51, said Mr. Penn paid his own expenses for the trip.

In Baghdad, Mr. Penn followed an itinerary set by the Iraqis, and was accompanied, like all foreigners here, by a government ''minder,'' whose tasks include approving visits and monitoring conversations. The actor began with a visit to Al Mansour children's hospital on Friday, touring wards filled with children said by the Iraqis to have fallen sick with cancers, malnutrition and other afflictions caused by United Nations economic sanctions. Over the weekend, he visited a dilapidated school in the Baghdad suburbs, and a water treatment plant on the Tigris River bombed by American aircraft in 1991.

He also met Tariq Aziz, the deputy prime minister who is one of Mr. Hussein's closest aides, and toured Saddam City, a teeming Baghdad slum that has been a center of underground resistance to Mr. Hussein. Late on Saturday, the actor eluded his minder and hailed a taxi for a second trip to Saddam City, where he walked the streets taking photographs and talking to people who recognized him from the video cassettes and DVD's of American movies that are wildly popular in Baghdad. One film frequently mentioned, he said, was ''Dead Man Walking,'' a dramatization of events leading to the execution in Louisiana of a rapist and murderer played by Mr. Penn.
Before leaving, the actor relented a little on his self-denying ordinance about keeping his political opinions to himself until he returned to the United States. In the interview, he said at one point that ''if it didn't involve killing'' Iraqis with American missiles and bombs, ''there's a lot of things I'd like to change in this country.'' He added, ''If I was a citizen of Iraq, I'd consider all options on behalf of my country.''

He also appealed to Mr. Bush to release whatever evidence he had to support American charges that Iraq was hiding banned weapons programs, saying, ''It's very hard to believe that the American people could find a justification for war if it were to be the case that there were no weapons of mass destruction.''

As for Mr. Bush's desire for new leadership in Iraq, he said that was a matter for Iraqis, not Americans. ''I do not believe that it is the manifest destiny of the United States to police the world,'' he said.
Correction: Dec. 24, 2002
An article on Dec. 16 about Sean Penn's visit to Iraq misstated the timing of an earlier trip by a Hollywood actor to a land in hostile confrontation with the United States -- Jane Fonda's visit to North Vietnam in 1972. It was in July, not at Christmas.

Correction: Dec. 24, 2002
An article on Dec. 16 about Sean Penn's visit to Iraq misstated the timing of an earlier trip by a Hollywood actor to a land in hostile confrontation with the United States -- Jane Fonda's visit to North Vietnam in 1972. It was in July, not at Christmas.
