THREATS AND RESPONSES: PAKISTAN FRONTIER; At the Afghan Border, Warnings of Attacks Tied to Iraq War
By Carlotta Gall
Jan. 28, 2003

Hundreds of Qaeda fighters and Taliban supporters -- now living with families in the rugged tribal area of South Waziristan in Pakistan -- are planning to intensify their attacks on Afghan territory if war breaks out in Iraq, interviews with three visitors from Pakistani tribal area indicate.

The statements by the men, who traveled across the border to be interviewed, have heightened the concerns of security officials here in this southeastern border village, where the most recent American soldier to be killed by hostile fire, Sgt. Steven Checo of the 82nd Airborne Division, died in a gunfight on Dec. 21.

The sergeant's night patrol surprised three men crossing from Pakistan to leave some rockets beside a house here, and the security officials see his death as a portent. They warn that Qaeda and Taliban supporters are increasing their infiltration -- preparing more, and bigger, attacks against American troops and local villagers who cooperate with them.

''They are the people who came out of Afghanistan when the Taliban fell,'' one of the men from Pakistan, who gave his name as Reghduanullah, said of the foreign fighters. ''I have seen them, they come to the bazaar.'' He described Sudanese, Central Asians and men from Muslim regions of Russia and China. He said they carried radios, were armed with rifles and grenades, and were always accompanied by local armed men, their hosts in the tribal areas.
He quoted the foreigners as saying: ''We swore we would fight against the Americans until they leave Afghanistan or we die. We will not give up our holy war against America.''

Mr. Reghduanullah asserted: ''I am sure they will do an operation soon. A lot of people want to be martyrs so they will come to fight the Americans.''

[United States and coalition forces are fighting a pitched battle against a group of 80 rebels aligned to the renegade leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar in the largest-scale fighting in the past nine months, an American military spokesman said Tuesday. At least 18 rebel fighters were killed, and there were no reported coalition casualties, the spokesman, Roger King, said at Bagram Air Base near Kabul.

[American warplanes attacked enemy positions with B-1 bombers, F-16's and AC-130 gunships, Mr. King said. The fighting in mountains in southeastern Afghanistan near the border with Pakistan was set off by a minor shootout nearby in which one man was killed, one injured and one detained, Mr. King said. He said the detained man said under questioning that a large group of men had massed in the mountain areas.

[Mr. King said the military sent Apache helicopters to the area to investigate, and they came under small-arms fire. The military responded with a quick-reaction force of fighter aircraft that struck the remote region with 500-pound and 2,000-pound bombs.
[Mr. King said the rebel fighters, while loyal to Mr. Hekmatyar, are believed to have sympathies and possible links to the ousted Taliban and to Al Qaeda.]

Mr. Reghduanullah said that many Pakistanis from the area joined the Taliban both before and during the American-led campaign, and that they offered the foreign and Afghan fighters shelter when they withdrew from Afghanistan last year.

Mr. Reghduanullah's view was supported by the representative in the border area for the Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, who for safety reasons would give only his title and first name, Engineer Amin. ''These days, Al Qaeda is very active and they are crossing over here a lot,'' he said. ''For a long time they were quiet but in the last two months they have started their activity.

''Our information is that when America starts the attack on Iraq, they will make an attack here. They will attack in big numbers, on the American base and against anyone who works with the Americans,'' he said.

Such attacks have long been promised, but for months, the raids have been small and isolated, involving just a few men at a time.

Their target is mainly the more than 1,000 American troops stationed in a line of bases along the eastern border with Pakistan. But the fighters have also attacked the Afghan police station in nearby Barmal, the main border crossing, where the police chief is open about his cooperation with American forces.

United Nations officials have reported that Taliban members have been trickling back in from Pakistan. One United Nations official said at a meeting of nongovernmental organizations over the weekend that Taliban fighters were gathering in Tora Bora, the mountainous area in eastern Afghanistan where Osama bin Laden was last heard of in December 2001.
Whatever their plans, the presence of Qaeda and Taliban fighters has alarmed people on both sides of the border. American Special Forces based in Shkin show an aggressive combat readiness when on patrol that is not currently seen elsewhere in Afghanistan. Flanked by heavily armed Afghan militia, they drive armored vehicles with machineguns on the turret and each side door.

Engineer Amin's concern is visible; shadows from sleeplessness ring his eyes. He moves only with well-armed bodyguards, and he meets with a foreigner in a safe house away from his home. Last month his house came under rocket attack for a second time -- a message, he said, from Al Qaeda and the Taliban, to stop his work as a liaison between the American military and the local community. His father and brother, who oppose his work with Mr. Karzai's government, left for Pakistan after the first attack, but his wife, children and cousins remain, he said.

Letters were recently left in the bazaar at Barmal, a few miles north of here, with threats to kill him, as well as the commander of the local Afghan militia and any other Afghans who cooperate with the Americans. He has a collection of different notes that have been found on the streets in the last month; all handwritten, photocopied letters, signed ''Members of the Mujahedeen.''

''The time of the mujahedeen is coming,'' warned the most recent letter, copies of which were dropped last Thursday night on the main street of Barmal. ''Those people who are working with the foreigners, and have good relations with foreigners, we will not let them be,'' it read, ''people like Engineer Amin.'' There was also an offer of 500,000 rupees -- about $9,000 -- to anyone who killed him or any other American collaborator.

Such threats against collaborators are repeated publicly in the tribal areas of Pakistan, said a second man from Pakistan, who gave his name as Hayatullah. ''In Pakistan they are saying these things openly,'' he said. ''The mullahs are saying if you meet with Americans you are an infidel, and if you kill an American you will go to paradise. If the mullah told some of these people to climb a mountain, they will.''

In their interview, the three visiting men said they were worried that the presence of Arab and other fugitive foreign fighters in Pakistan was going to bring war or deeper trouble to their area. ''Until all these refugees leave the place we will not have peace,'' said the third interviewee, an older man from Shkai, who gave his name as Muhammad Sarwar.

The three said they knew of six men who had been murdered in South Waziristan in the last three months because they were suspected of being American informants.
The killers in one case daubed a message on the nearby bridge. ''We have killed a spy of America, he had dollars, an expensive watch and a G.P.S. finder,'' it read, referring to a Global Positioning System, Mr. Reghduanullah said. He added that he saw the decaying body and the message about eight days after the killing.

The three men said that local tribal elders, as well as Pakistani government and secret service officials, were sympathetic to the foreign fighters, in clear opposition to their government's policy of cooperation with the United States. They were tipping the fighters off before raids so they could avoid capture, and allowing them to cross the border on their incursions into Afghanistan, the men said.

Asked about the accounts of the men, a senior Pakistani official dismissed them as baseless. He denied the presence of Al Qaeda in the tribal areas and said families there were too scared of arrest to harbor them. Yet a Pakistani police official in Peshawar, the capital of the North-West Frontier Province, recently acknowledged that there was an Arab presence in South Waziristan.

In Afghanistan, Engineer Amin, and the police chief, Daoud Jan, have been lobbying the central government and the American military for resources to guard against further attacks, but they lament that their pleas are going unheard.

''They should help us, and send the Afghan National Army,'' the police chief said. ''If the attackers see I have soldiers, and the Americans with me, they will never attack us.''
