Resolved: War Is Hell. So Is the Fine Print; For the City Council, Wording of a Statement on Iraq Turns Into a Battle
By Nichole M. Christian
March 9, 2003

Last year, the New York City Council introduced 648 ceremonial resolutions, rallying to support or oppose everything from World Breast-Feeding Week and Older Americans Month, to a plea for the United States Navy to vacate Vieques, P.R. Legislators everywhere love these pain-free expressions of support for popular causes, and well over half of the Council's 2002 initiatives in New York passed with little protest.

But an effort by the Council, one of the most liberal in the country, to align itself with its equally liberal constituents to condemn a war against Iraq has become quite an adventure, with members bitterly divided over whether a city altered by terrorists should weigh in at all.

For weeks, the debate has dragged on with back-room battles over semantics and competing views of constituents. It lingered even as New York played host to one of the nation's largest and loudest antiwar protests. At least 125 other cities, from Detroit to Denver, have approved some fashion of an antiwar resolution, though a handful of small towns like Ely, Minn., have recently rescinded their opposition.

The debate in New York is like all things political, but some see it as a larger symbol of a city in transition, still on edge over an event that in many ways has changed both its physical and political views.

''New York City Councils have always conducted foreign policy,'' said Douglas Muzzio, public policy professor at Baruch College. ''But the war is taking on added saliency because the Council recognizes it's a high-stakes issue for their constituents. Everyone is nervous and anxious, and there are differing opinions on how council members' actions and statements will affect their ability to get re-elected.''

New York City's antiwar resolution, introduced in October, appears to be moving toward approval. A vote is set for Wednesday with 29 Council members, including Speaker Gifford Miller, lined up behind a revised version that was changed to appease some who saw the first draft as more critical of President Bush than of Saddam Hussein.

But hardly anyone is happy.

''It's frustrating and embarrassing that New York is going to be one of the 100-some-odd cities that finally comes to grips with an antiwar resolution,'' said Councilman Charles Barron of Brooklyn, one of 17 sponsors of the earlier resolution. ''This is a Council that's been out front on a lot of things, and we should have taken care of business a long time ago, so that New York was one of the first cities to oppose the war. Saddam Hussein has not been linked to the World Trade Center tragedy and he has not adequately been linked to Al Qaeda. What's so wrong with this Council saying that the president has not proved his case?''

Opponents continue to argue that any antiwar resolution represents the wrong message for this city.

''New York City was attacked by terrorists a few blocks from where this resolution is being debated,'' said Councilman Peter F. Vallone Jr. of Queens. ''I can't forget that.''

The version of the resolution expected to pass on Wednesday leaves open the option of war as a last resort, while the much more strongly worded original draft opposed allowing President Bush to unilaterally declare war against Iraq without the authority of the United Nations.
''The manner in which the United States Government is responding to the crisis involving Iraq has caused great concern among many New Yorkers,'' part of the revised Resolution No. 549-A says.

It also stresses the need to deal with threats to world peace ''in accordance with international law and, whenever possible, on a multilateral basis.'' It goes on to mention the financial impact, quoting National Bureau of Economic Research estimates that such a war would cost $150 billion to $750 billion.

In the original wording, since deleted, Resolution No. 549 stated that ''each misstep in our judgment has the potential of being magnified exponentially, and could bring with it the most devastating consequences imaginable, not just in the Middle East but to our own shores as well.''

William Perkins, the Manhattan councilman who wrote and introduced the first resolution, said that out of the Council's linguistic wrangling -- however contentious -- a larger lesson about New York has emerged. ''People criticize New York for being overly liberal,'' he said. ''If nothing else I think what has happened on this issue reveals this is not a knee-jerk liberal town. The opinions run deep and they reflect mainstream America more than we might like to admit.''

Observers say the fact that the Council has struggled to reach consensus on a resolution, which is not very likely to influence the larger debate over whether the country goes to war, mirrors the problems many people are having reconciling themselves to a war that seems more imminent each day.

''The Council is as conflicted as the rest of the city, the rest of the country,'' said Kenneth K. Fisher, a former councilman from Brooklyn. ''It's an institution that places a high value on consensus, but consensus on an issue of life and death is understandably difficult and takes time.''

The first indication of conflict within the Council came Feb. 26, when a regularly scheduled vote on the resolution was postponed at the last minute. Reporters were told the vote was delayed to help build a wider margin of support on the floor. Yet people close to the situation said the resolution sat deadlocked in a 3-to-3 vote by the Cultural Affairs Committee, where it had originated.
The committee's seventh member, Philip Reed, a resolution supporter, was out of town, leaving little chance for the vote to reach a majority.

More problematic, though, were comments by Councilman Robert Jackson, who six days before the Feb. 26 vote inflamed an already tense standoff with his interpretation of why the resolution had stalled

''New York City is the home away from home for most Jews,'' Mr. Jackson, who represents parts of Harlem, Inwood and Washington Heights, said during an interview on a WNYC radio show. ''And this is seen by many members of the Jewish community as a resolution that will go against Bush and, in the long run, will not be in the best interests of the State of Israel.''

The resolution quickly took a back seat to controversy.

''What he said was unfortunately seen as a criticism rather than an observation that probably has some basis in fact,'' Professor Muzzio said. ''People in general, Jewish and otherwise, have serious personal concerns over this war. But any discussion of Israel in this issue is terrain people fear to tread.''

Hoping to refocus the debate on the resolution, another faction of council members stepped in with a plan to rewrite the measure, sharpening the attack against Saddam Hussein while toning down the language that Mr. Perkins had originally written. That language pointed the finger mostly at President Bush, demanding that he explain himself and his call to war.

One person pressing for changes to the resolution was Councilwoman Gale A. Brewer. She became a supporter after rewriting it and being inundated with hundreds of phone calls, e-mail messages and letters from people in her district, the Upper West Side of Manhattan.

''There aren't many ideological splits like this in the Council,'' she said. ''But there are such strong feelings for Bush's plan and against Bush's plan, that if this resolution was ever going to pass, it had to be more inclusive of some of those differences.''
Regardless of the outcome, Mr. Perkins said he had achieved his goal. After all is said and done, New York has an antiwar resolution.

Still, publicly and privately, many question whether the Council's deep differences have truly been resolved, or whether members are merely trying to move past a rare divisive moment in which it resembled, more than ever before, the city it represents.

Councilwoman Melinda R. Katz of Queens has still not been swayed and said she intended to vote down the resolution.

''It's the wrong direction to try to tie the hands of United States,'' she said. ''And I have grave doubts about leaving our destiny in the hands of the United Nations Security Council, where France and some of the other countries have made it clear that they don't want any type of pre-emptive strike or sole behavior that helps us to protect ourselves.''

Some said it was simply time to get back to work.

''Yes, we should be one of the cities opposing the war, no question,'' said John C. Liu, a councilman from Queens and an initial endorser of the resolution. ''But few cities are facing as dire a fiscal crisis as we are.''

The reason, he said, is that unlike New York, those cities were not attacked on Sept. 11, 2001. ''We were,'' Mr. Liu said, adding, ''The budget ought to be our only real priority.''