The World: First Among Evils?; The Debate Over Attacking Iraq Heats Up
By David E. Sanger
Sept. 1, 2002


WHEN Vice President Dick Cheney declared last week that ''the risks of inaction are greater than the risks of action'' when it comes to ousting Saddam Hussein, the rest of the world read between the lines. Despite White House denials that President Bush has yet to decide about military action, it sounded as if Mr. Cheney was saying that he and his boss have concluded there is no diplomatic solution to the Iraq problem.

Further United Nations inspections, he said, would dangerously ''provide false comfort.'' Providing no details, he said Iraq will obtain nuclear weapons ''fairly soon.'' His tone suggested the administration doesn't plan to get sucked into a lengthy discussion on the subject with its allies.

It is that sense of urgency -- and a debate over whether it is justified -- that will likely dominate the arguments over Iraq in the next few weeks. Mr. Cheney has presented the specter of an Iraq on the verge of a nuclear capability that it could use to blackmail the world, ''seek domination of the entire Middle East'' and ''take control of a great portion of the world's energy supplies.'' But his critics -- who include virtually all Arab governments and most European allies -- replied that if the White House has evidence that doom is imminent, they have not shared it.

Now, as President Bush decamps from his monthlong stay at his ranch here, he knows it is up to him to make the case that delay could be deadly. He will argue, aides say, that the rest of the world is averting its eyes to disaster as surely as Europe did in the 1930's, or America before it was attacked in 1941 and 2001.
That is a very different tone than the administration struck just a year ago, before Sept. 11. Then it talked of containing Iraq with ''smart sanctions'' as it debated how to handle Iran and North Korea, the other members of what Mr. Bush later called the ''axis of evil.'' Both seem closer to a nuclear capability than Iraq, and Tehran has historically been more involved with far-flung terrorists. The Central Intelligence Agency believes Pyongyang already has what Iraq seeks: crude nuclear weapons and missiles that can fly hundreds of miles and might some day span the Pacific.

So when did Iraq become the most urgent of these problems -- the one that had to be dealt with first?

The answer is sometime after Sept. 11. Before then Iraq was considered essentially a regional threat whose conventional military power was far weaker than it was during the 1991 gulf war. And critics of the Cheney campaign about Iraq argue that, at least based on what is known publicly, the equation hasn't changed much.

''Where is the sense of urgency coming from?'' Gen. Wesley Clark, one of several former military officials who have urged the administration to take a deep breath, asked on television. ''He's had weapons of mass destruction for 20 years. He doesn't have nuclear material, and we'd likely have some notice of the breakdown of the containment regime.''

But one thing has changed: the regional threat that Iraq poses now has more clearly global implications. Its efforts to inflame the Israeli-Palestinian fight reverberate in America's extremely delicate relationships in the Middle East, and those relationships are critical to its ability to secure aid and sympathy in its war on terrorism. Beyond that, the administration is convinced that sooner or later Al Qaeda and Mr. Hussein will find a mutuality of interests, with Iraq providing chemical, biological or nuclear materials and Al Qaeda the bodies to deliver them.
OF course Al Qaeda might look elsewhere for that material (Pakistan comes to mind, and the former Soviet states of Central Asia). But the way the Bush team sees the world, no one has more motive to strike the United States than Iraq, and no one has more opportunity than the graduates of Al Qaeda's training camps.

''I don't know how much stronger a case you have to have that this man is a very dangerous player in international politics, and that he is not reformable,'' says Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, citing the times Mr. Hussein has used chemical weapons, bamboozled inspectors and built nuclear complexes. Her clear conclusion is that Iraq is not a power America can engage, even in the kind of arms-length, smoke-signal conversation that is sporadically under way with North Korea and Iran. In the Cheney-Rice-Rumsfeld logic, that leaves Mr. Bush two options: pray that Saddam Hussein won't get the weapons he seeks, or depose him before he does.

Where the administration's critics part with the logic is not on their analysis of Saddam Hussein's wickedness, but on the question of whether it can be safely contained. ''People out here think this sense that time is running out is manufactured,'' said Stephen Cohen, a Middle East expert at the Israel Policy Forum, at the end of a tour of the region. ''There is a sense that the U.S. built up an energy in the war on terrorism, it kind of bogged down, and this is the way to put energy back in it.''

So Mr. Bush has been deluged for the past two weeks with warnings that rather than aid his battle against terrorism, a unilateral attack on Mr. Hussein would undercut the cooperation and intelligence help he needs. That was the message delivered in an awkward visit to his ranch last week by the Saudi ambassador, Prince Bandar. As soon as lunch ended, the Saudis repeated their warnings that an attack would lead to anti-American eruptions throughout the Arab world -- exactly what Saddam seeks, they say. Mr. Cheney argues that ''the opposite is true'' and that the eruptions in Baghdad would be joyous, ''the same way throngs in Kabul greeted the Americans.''

Mr. Cheney's speeches were also designed to answer the critiques that have hurt the most: Those delivered by former President George Bush's most trusted national security advisers, Brent Scowcroft and James A. Baker III. Mr. Cheney never named his old colleagues. But he left no doubt that he disagreed with Mr. Scowcroft's conclusion that ''Saddam's goals have little in common with the terrorists who threaten us'' and that the Iraqi leader wouldn't risk nuclear blackmail because he is a ''power-hungry survivor'' who knows America's response would be devastating.

NOR did Mr. Cheney seem persuaded by Mr. Baker's argument that America has no choice but to ''occupy the moral high ground'' by seeking new authorization to act against Mr. Hussein in the United Nations. The White House fears such a process would delay or derail the goal of ousting the Iraqi leader.

The vice president has not addressed why the strategies employed to keep the other axis of evil members in check won't work in the case of Iraq, but in an interview, Ms. Rice did. ''There's a certain logic to each of these cases,'' she said, that explains why Mr. Bush is satisfied for now to jawbone Iran and North Korea while declaring there is no way to live with Mr. Hussein.
As North Korea desperately stumbles toward economic reforms, she said, the United States holds a trump card: Unless Pyongyang's suspected weapons sites are inspected, the West won't deliver the proliferation-resistant reactors that will give the North the electricity it desperately needs.

Of course, that was also true a year ago when Mr. Bush and Ms. Rice came to the White House breathing fire about the North Korean threat. But that view has slowly changed, a rare victory for Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and for the Japanese and South Koreans, who Ms. Rice acknowledges have a big stake in how this unfolds. That may explain why the administration welcomed Japan's announcement Friday that its prime minister will visit Pyongyang.

In Iran's case, Ms. Rice argues that the split between the Iranian people and the hardline clerics who hold the levers of power offers America an opening. ''The goal here,'' she said, ''is to appeal to and encourage that part of Iranian society not satisfied with a government that, while presenting a moderate front to the outside, supports terrorism, builds weapons of mass destruction, sends weapons into the West Bank.'' She is encouraged, she says, that some reformers in the Iranian parliament have asked ''hard questions about Iranian policy.''

Iraq, she argues, is very different. The cease-fire terms Mr. Hussein signed in 1991 were clear: He would hold no weapons of mass destruction. ''This wasn't about negotiating weapons inspections,'' she said. ''It's about disarmament.''

As he returns to Washington, Mr. Bush will be making the case that the world may be ready to fuzz up its memories of that agreement, but he is not.
