EYES ON IRAQ: THE OPPOSITION; A Microcosm of Terror In a Torn Kurdish City
By John F. Burns
Aug. 3, 2002

More than a decade after Saddam Hussein's warplanes dropped poison gas canisters here, killing perhaps 5,000 people in one of the worst such attacks since World War I, this city was still struggling to get back on its feet.

Then, thousands of miles away, came the events of Sept. 11. Within weeks, a battle wrested this city from deeply conservative mullahs and restored secular control. But an Islamic breakaway group known as Jund-ul-Islam, or Soldiers of God, sharply stepped up a string of ambushes, bombings and assassinations from bases east of Halabja, threatening to paralyze life anew here, Kurdish leaders here say.

Kurdish leaders contend that this group has ties both to Al Qaeda and to Mr. Hussein, who lost control of the territory after a 1991 uprising caused the region's 3.6 million Kurds to be put under Western protection. But American officials appear skeptical about the Kurdish claims of outside assistance for the militants, and have rebuffed the Kurds' appeals for the kind of direct military help the United States has given the Philippines and Yemen since Sept. 11.

The Kurdish leaders say that in the villages under their control, the militants have established a pocket version of Afghanistan under the Taliban, with heavily bearded mullahs imposing a way of life patterned on the village culture of ancient Islam.

In June, officials here say, the group narrowly missed assassinating the leader of the Kurdish regional government based in Sulaimaniya. Five guards were killed in the attempt on the leader, Barham Salih, who was preparing for a meeting with a senior State Department official, Ryan Crocker, at the time.

For Halabja, the situation has meant a shattering of fragile hopes.

A ghost town for the first years after Mr. Hussein's chemical attack in March 1988, the city had slowly begun reviving, until its population by the late 1990's had recovered almost to its pre-1988 level of 75,000. By then, fears of toxic residues in the environment had begun to recede.

But now, families fearful of attacks by the militants are once again heading west into the heartland of the Kurdish enclave, which occupies the three northern provinces of Iraq.

The reverberations reach back to Washington, where President Bush's vow to overthrow Mr. Hussein, possibly with an American military invasion, has stirred intensifying debate. Mr. Bush has cited the Iraqi leader's action in ''gassing his own people'' in Halabja as proof of his evil. Mr. Bush has also suggested that Iraqi success in developing biological, chemical and nuclear weapons might one day enable Mr. Hussein to hand the weapons over to terrorists.

Kurdish leaders have deep reservations about Mr. Bush's plans for action against Mr. Hussein, fearing Kurdish aspirations for autonomy within Iraq might suffer in the upheaval. When American officials have come here in recent months to discuss ways in which the Kurds could help oust Mr. Hussein, the Kurds have responded with appeals for more limited American military action, against the militants.
Since 1991, the Kurdish territory has effectively been in rebellion against Mr. Hussein's government, which has never tired of seeking ways to subvert Kurdish rule. The Kurdish leaders claim to have captured militants who have told them of secret meetings with agents of Mr. Hussein's secret police.

Mr. Hussein has been condemned as a Muslim apostate by Islamic militant leaders, including Osama bin Laden, but Kurdish officials say religious politics mean little to the Iraqi ruler when he sees an opportunity to strike his enemies.

''Look, this is a man who helped Islamic militant groups in Syria when he wanted to destabilize the government there, and who wraps himself in the cloak of Islam every time he looks for support from across the Arab world, even though he's ordered the killing of some of the most important Muslim leaders in Iraq,'' said one senior Kurdish leader. ''So why wouldn't he help Jund-ul-Islam, if he thought it would help him?''

The Kurds also contend that Jund-ul-Islam appears to have links to Al Qaeda that flow, in part, from the geography of the Kurdish enclave. Halabja is flanked on three sides by mountains forming Iraq's border with Iran. This proximity was at the root of its suffering in 1988, when an alliance between Kurdish separatist groups and Iran's ayatollahs during the Iran-Iraq war was the trigger for the poison gas attack here, and for similar attacks elsewhere that some blamed on Iran.

Now Jund-ul-Islam has built a fortified network of villages and outposts deep in the valleys running eastward from Halabja toward Iran. The villages cover only a small area, perhaps as little as 100 square miles, but Kurdish officials believe access to the border could explain the recent growth of the group. They contend that as many as 120 Arabs and other non-Kurdish militants have arrived from Afghanistan to reinforce the 400 to 500 Kurds who are said to form the group's core.

The Kurdish claims tally with earlier concerns about Qaeda fighters fleeing Afghanistan, which at its closest point lies about 1,300 road miles east of here. After the Taliban's collapse under American bombing last winter, American officials said Iran was allowing Qaeda fugitives to flee into its territory.

Iranian officials have issued vehement denials, but the Kurds say some men who reached Iran moved into northern Iraq, drawn by the region's isolation. The 17,000-square-mile Kurdish territory, protected by an American and British ''no-flight zone,'' has only a lightly equipped militia, with virtually no counterterrorism training or equipment.
The Americans' reasons for not wanting to go after this group now, Kurdish officials say, appear to include an unwillingness to offer Mr. Hussein a pretext for attacking the Kurds before a potential American invasion, and a reluctance to provoke nearby Iran.

But Kurdish officials say the group poses an immediate threat. ''These are very dangerous people, and more so with every passing day,'' said Karim Sinjari, interior minister in the regional government established by one of the two major Kurdish factions, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. ''So if the Americans are going to help us, they should help us now, before the problems become worse.''

The officials' claims about the group's outside links have proved impossible to verify. The officials say they are holding 10 or more Arabs from Jund-ul-Islam's ranks and that some of them have confessed to training with Al Qaeda. But requests for interviews with the prisoners were turned down, with Kurdish officials saying that sensitive intelligence matters were at stake.

American officials who question Jund-ul-Islam's links to terrorist networks beyond Afghanistan, and to Mr. Hussein, point to a history of Islamic militancy in Halabja. After a 1991 uprising against Mr. Hussein among the Kurds, this city became the bastion of the Islamic Movement of Kurdistan, a deeply conservative group that that drew support from Iran during the Iran-Iraq war.

In the turmoil that followed the poison gas attack and the uprising, the Islamic Movement seized control of the city and held it for 10 years. But the movement split several times, culminating in the break that spawned Jund-ul-Islam. Two weeks after Sept. 11, forces of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan stormed Halabja, displacing the Islamic Movement.

Just about everyone here would welcome the end of Mr. Hussein. But most Halabjans see the American concern as coming years too late. Grasping for answers, many have fallen into the fatalism common to survivors of disasters.

''God has never been very kind to the city of Halabja, and we have no reason to expect any change,'' said Dr. Serwer Arif, a 32-year-old surgeon working at the Swedish-built Qandil hospital, which handles some of the cancers, respiratory illnesses and congenital deformities that people here attribute to the poison gas attacks. With a fleeting smile, Dr. Arif recalled his mother's reaction when he told her last year, in Sulaimaniya, that he had been posted here. ''She looked at me as if she would never see me again,'' he said.
In Halabja, joblessness is chronic, so Aras Abed, a 32-year-old man who lost both his parents and all 10 of his brothers and sisters in the attack, considers himself lucky to have a $50-a-month job with a British relief organization. But years later, he remains haunted by memories of stumbling into a basement near his home three days after the attack and finding his relatives piled together, horribly disfigured by their death agonies.

Mr. Abed has his own family now, living in what was his parents' house. He has considered leaving but remained, he said, because he has an income and because he wants to be near his family's common grave.

Asked about the militants, he shrugged and said: ''I learned what terrorism is on the day Saddam Hussein sent his planes. These new terrorists are the same, all they bring is death.''
