THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.S. and Britain Press for Resolution On Iraq, but Make Minimal Headway
By Steven R. Weisman and Richard W. Stevenson
Feb. 4, 2003

The United States and Britain opened a week of intensive pressure on France and other nations today to support quick passage of a second United Nations Security Council resolution that would authorize military force against Iraq. But they seemed to be making little progress.

At the same time, the chief United Nations weapons inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, said they would travel to Baghdad for two days of meetings this weekend, giving the Iraqis another chance to clarify a long list of unanswered questions about their weapons programs.

With France continuing to insist on allowing weapons inspectors several weeks, if not months, to do their work, attention this week will be on the United Nations Security Council, where Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is expected to speak on Wednesday, disclosing previously classified information on Iraq's weapons programs.

Mr. Powell is likely to make public recently intercepted communications from Iraq that indicate a pattern of deception, even as United Nations weapons inspectors seek to find Iraqi chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programs, government officials said today.

Bush administration officials said the intercepts, taken as a whole, tended to corroborate the Bush administration's conclusions that Iraq has failed to comply with the United Nations resolution designed to force Baghdad to disarm and disclose its weapons programs.

In some of the intercepts, including telephone conversations monitored by the National Security Agency, Iraqi government officials can be heard apparently discussing the movement of material in advance of inspections and coaching scientists on how to evade questions from the inspectors. In others, like communications cited in a report in this week's issue of Newsweek, Iraqi officials can be heard bragging about how they have seemingly defeated the inspectors.

The decision to release summaries of intercepts has been fiercely debated within intelligence circles, with some Central Intelligence Agency officials contending that the disclosures may reveal a greater United States eavesdropping capability than the Iraqis might have suspected.

Administration officials have been careful not to reveal what is to be presented, but Mr. Powell said in an op-ed article appearing today in The Wall Street Journal that the presentation would not contain a ''smoking gun'' that would prove the existence of prohibited weapons in Iraq.

Rather, Mr. Powell said, the intelligence information will show ''further evidence of Iraq's pattern of deception'' and ''evidence concerning the weapons programs'' hidden by Saddam Hussein.''We will, in sum, offer a straightforward, sober and compelling demonstration that Saddam is concealing the evidence of mass destruction, while preserving the weapons themselves,'' Mr. Powell wrote.

At the same time, Mr. Powell's Wall Street Journal article did not say that he planned to disclose evidence of links between Iraq and terrorist organizations, including Al Qaeda. Some of this evidence has leaked out in news reports in recent days but has been dismissed by some French officials as unpersuasive.

''We understand that there could be some interesting information about links with Al Qaeda,'' one French official said. ''But everybody knows the history. For years, Al Qaeda and Saddam Hussein have been deadly enemies. Nothing that has come out so far proves that there is a relationship.''

In the article, Mr. Powell said Saddam Hussein's government had permitted United Nations weapons inspectors to interview Iraqi scientists only when Iraqi representatives were present. He said inspectors had been harassed and subjected to protests that he said were unlikely without the encouragement of the government.

Mr. Powell is also likely to discuss Iraq's continuing purchases of equipment that could be used in weapons programs, in violation of a series of United Nations resolutions. In the Wall Street Journal article, Mr. Powell said Baghdad had continued to acquire weapons-related equipment, ''with proscribed imports arriving as recently as last month.'' Mr. Powell did not identify the type of imported material.

In his presentation to the United Nations, Mr. Powell is likely to argue that there are some connections between the Iraqi government and Al Qaeda, but the evidence on Iraqi weapons programs will dominate his presentation.

Mr. Powell and his aides appear to recognize that the evidence linking Iraq and Al Qaeda is less convincing than that concerning the Iraqi weapons program. The Bush administration has charged that Iraq has maintained ties to Al Qaeda through Ansar al-Islam, a small Islamic group operating in northern Iraq.In news reports in Europe in recent days, Mullah Krekar, a leader of Ansar al-Islam, denied any connection with Baghdad and said the Bush administration was unfairly using his group as an excuse to attack Iraq.

Military officials say that they would be ready to begin a war against Iraq in mid-February, but that a more ideal time would be about a month after that. Administration officials cautioned, however, that there was no requirement that a United Nations resolution authorizing force be approved by mid-March.

French officials say that the main reason for their reluctance to endorse a war against Iraq without many more weeks or even months of inspections is the widespread feeling in France that it would embolden Al Qaeda, which is viewed in France as a far more dangerous threat than Mr. Hussein.

If anything, French officials say, Iraq and Al Qaeda are being driven into each other's arms by American policies.

On the other hand, French officials say that if the United States has real and concrete evidence of links between the Iraq and Al Qaeda right now, its disclosure could go far in changing French public opinion and, in turn, the opinion of President Jacques Chirac and his advisers.

Asked if France might be willing to accept the use of force in the absence of such evidence, a French diplomat said recently, ''Never say never.'' But he said such a change would be much easier if Mr. Powell could make a truly startling presentation on Iraq's weapons or its conduct.

Today, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain spoke by telephone with President Chirac in preparation for their meeting in France on Tuesday. Mr. Bush spoke to Mr. Chirac over the weekend, principally about the space shuttle disaster but also reportedly about Iraq.Mr. Blair was said to be ready to give Mr. Chirac a preview of what Mr. Powell would be presenting the next day.

Meanwhile, the White House today summoned the senior leaders from both parties for a briefing early Wednesday morning on Mr. Powell's presentation.

Democrats have criticized the administration for providing Congress with too little information about both Iraq and North Korea. They said today that the Bush administration should have been willing to share with Congress at least as much intelligence as Mr. Powell will present to the Security Council.

''While we are pleased that some members of the Senate will be briefed, we are wondering why the administration is unwilling to brief the entire Senate,'' said Ranit Schmelzer, the spokeswoman for Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader.

Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said top officials had been working together to determine what intelligence can be made public without jeopardizing the sources of the information.

The goal, Mr. Fleischer said, was to provide the public with ''as much information as possible about why we feel so strongly and know that Iraq has biological weapons'' without ''anybody getting killed in Iraq as a result of this, or the source of this information drying up in the future.''

Much of the material to be presented constitutes Iraqi efforts to deceive the United Nations inspectors, administration officials said. But French officials say that it is already known that Iraq is not cooperating with the inspectors. They insist that more would be needed to persuade France that inspections are not working despite Iraqi intransigence and that force must be applied.Mr. Bush and Mr. Blair met on Friday amid signs of a rift on the value of seeking another resolution at the Security Council. Mr. Blair said that a second resolution authorizing the use of force was essential, but Mr. Bush's aides said that while such a resolution was desirable, it was not essential.

''We would like to seek a Security Council resolution,'' said an administration official. ''But we have not decided whether to seek one or what it would say if we did.''

Asked about the campaign directed at France, the official said, ''We don't view anyone on the Council as a lost cause.'' France is considered pivotal because Russia has signaled the possibility that it might support such a resolution, and China is believed to be ready to do so if France and Russia can be lined up.

Mr. Bush met tonight with the king of Bahrain, Sheik Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, who also met today with Vice President Dick Cheney and Mr. Powell. The Navy's Fifth Fleet is based in Bahrain, on the Persian Gulf south of Iraq.
