A NATION AT WAR: THE ATTACK; TAXI SUICIDE BLAST KILLS 4 AMERICANS IN NEW IRAQ TACTIC
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 30, 2003

A suicide bomber blew up his taxi on Saturday and killed four United States soldiers from the Third Infantry Division near the southern city of Najaf. American forces fired a heavy artillery and mortar bomdardment north of that city overnight and allied warplanes resumed pounding targets in and around Baghdad today.

The planes also struck a meeting hall northeast of Basra in southern Iraq on Friday night where 200 Baath Party officials and forces loyal to President Saddam Hussein were gathered.

The suicide attack on Saturday was a disturbing new tactic for military commanders in Iraq. It occurred at a checkpoint just after noon, military officials said, as soldiers with the First Brigade of the Third Infantry Division sought to maintain tight control over a road into Najaf, where the division has been tied up since last Sunday trying to prevent Baghdad from sending reinforcements to irregular forces.

As many as 1,000 Iraqi irregulars have been killed as they tried to disrupt the advance of the American troops who are supposed to strike a front-line Republican Guard division guarding the approach to Baghdad north of Najaf. [Map, Page B16.]In Baghdad, Iraq's vice president, Taha Yassin Ramadan, identified the suicide bomber as a noncommissioned army officer, Ali Hammadi al-Namani, and promised more such attacks. ''Any method that stops or kills the enemy will be used,'' the vice president told a news conference. ''What are they doing in our land? Let them pack and go.''

The bomb attack on Saturday signaled that, despite the heavy Iraqi casualty toll this past week, the men under Mr. Hussein's command are still ready to risk their lives -- whether out of loyalty, coercion or fear.

The meeting hall near Basra was leveled in a precision strike, as seen in a gun camera video recording the destruction of the hall shown by the United States Central Command headquarters in Qatar. The air raids continued this morning.

The city is not yet under allied control. British officials said they gleaned information about the meeting and its location from intelligence sources inside the city and from prisoners of war.

''These are people who are only a mobile phone call away from disaster,'' said a British spokesman, Lt. Col. Ronnie McCourt. In all, nine targets associated with the party's hierarchy were hit during the day.Separately on Saturday morning, British commando forces dashed into Basra, Iraq's second-largest city, and destroyed two large statues of Mr. Hussein in a strike that the British said was intended to reassure Basra's 1.5 million people that coalition forces are determined to topple the Baghdad government.

The raid followed several days of efforts by British forces to capitalize on what British officials had portrayed as an incipient rebellion in the city. Some Basra residents have tried to flee to British lines in the suburbs while loyalist forces fired upon them with mortars and machine guns to herd them back, British military officials said.

The officials confirmed that one soldier was missing and presumed dead and four were wounded in an incident in the Basra area on Saturday. Some reports attributed the casualties to allied fire, but Colonel McCourt said in Qatar that the incident was still under investigation.

In his radio address on Saturday, President Bush vilified Mr. Hussein and said, ''Thanks to our fighting forces, the regime that once terrorized all of Iraq now controls a small portion of that country.''

He said Mr. Hussein had been reduced to ''rule by terror'' and cited, as many military spokesmen did during the day, an anecdote from the battlefield earlier last week in which an Iraqi woman who waved to coalition troops was found hanging from a street lamp when the soldiers returned by the same route.

''Given the nature of this regime, we expect such war crimes, but we will not excuse them,'' Mr. Bush said. ''War criminals will be hunted relentlessly and judged severely.''

Military officials said early Saturday that they had recovered remains from a shallow grave near Nasiriya, where 5 Americans were taken captive and 12 were missing from an attack on a maintenance company column as it passed through the city.''I can't tell you for sure'' that they were from the 507th Maintenance Company, said Maj. Gen. Victor Renuart of the United States Central Command. He said a forensic team was on its way to the site.

Bloodstained American uniforms were discovered in a Nasiriya hospital last week, along with a cache of weapons, 3,000 chemical weapons suits and other signs that the hospital had served as a command post for irregular forces who are believed to have captured some marines and killed others.

On Friday, Brig. Gen. John F. Kelly, assistant commander of the First Marine Division, said his troops in Nasiriya had interviewed the Iraqi head of a hospital who reported treating two wounded American soldiers last week. The soldiers were taken away at gunpoint, General Kelly quoted the doctor as saying.

Military officials in Qatar said today that a marine was killed Friday when he was hit by a Humvee during a clash with Iraqi soldiers in south-central Iraq. Another marine was reported killed Saturday, also in south-central Iraq, when the Humvee he was riding in rolled into a canal.

On Saturday, American commanders said they had halted the firing of Tomahawk cruise missiles that fly through Saudi airspace because two missiles had malfunctioned and crashed in Saudi Arabia, spreading some alarm.

''We continue to use Tomahawk cruise missiles throughout the theater,'' General Renuart said at a news conference in Qatar. ''We have coordinated with the Saudis to hold a couple of routes that might put them in a position where they could be close to any civilian population.''

At least 675 Tomahawk cruise missiles have been fired from ships in the Persian Gulf and surrounding waters during the 11-day-old military campaign, the Pentagon says.Airstrikes continued against Baghdad on Saturday and this morning, with explosions thundering south of the city and striking the 11-story Information Ministry, the center of Iraq's propaganda operations. The attacks are aimed at keeping pressure on the Medina Division of the Republican Guard that is expected to be the target of the war's first large-scale land engagement.

Military officials said assaults by helicopter gunships late Friday had done considerable damage to the Republican Guard forces facing the Third Infantry near Karbala.

About 30 AH-64 Apache helicopters destroyed 25 Iraqi tanks, armored vehicles and trucks in the nighttime raids, Maj. Hugh Cate told reporters traveling with the 101st Airborne Division. He also estimated that 55 Iraqi soldiers had been killed.

Military officials said that another mission of the airborne unit would be to free the Third Infantry Division from its positions surrounding Najaf.

Also Saturday, military officials said a missile that struck downtown Kuwait City that morning was probably fired from Iraq. The explosion caused minor injuries to two people but destroyed a movie theater and parking garage at a large mall.

Military officials also went to some lengths to explain further a pause in the military campaign against Baghdad mentioned by some commanders in the field. Some reports spoke of a pause of up to six days to secure the Army's rear area.

''It's purely a case of shaping the battlefield, getting our troops equipped and in the right place for the next part of the campaign,'' said a spokesman for the British defense staff, Capt. Al Lockwood.
A meeting of battlefield officers last week reviewed a plan of advance that showed the Third Division attacking Baghdad from the southwest, while the First Marine Expeditionary Force splits into components of three 6,000-man forces attacking from the south and southeast. Under this plan, the British 16th Airborne Assault Brigade, along with units of the Seventh Armored Brigade -- known as the Desert Rats -- combine as an attack formation from the direction of Kut in the east.

Little has been said about an eastern front, although Prime Minister Tony Blair said last week that forces on this flank would face the Baghdad Division of the Republican Guard. Mr. Hussein is thought to have moved Republican Guard defenders to his hometown and power base, Tikrit, north of the capital. There has been no coalition assault from the north, in part because Turkey denied American ground troops permission to move through Turkish territory into northern Iraq.

But some 1,000 paratroopers were dropped into Kurdish-held regions of northern Iraq and, on Friday, about 100 American Special Forces soldiers assisted a successful Kurdish attack on the guerrillas of Ansar al-Islam, a group linked by the Bush administration to Al Qaeda.

Kurdish officials said Saturday that Iraqi soldiers had pulled back overnight from two frontline positions around the strategic city of Kirkuk, apparently to minimize the risk Iraqi forces face from American bombardment.
