A NATION AT WAR: AID SHIPMENT; British Cargo Vessel Carrying Relief Supplies Docks in a Southern Iraqi Port
By Jane Perlez With Marc Santora
March 29, 2003

A British ship loaded with food and medical supplies docked at this strategic Iraqi port today, the first vessel to arrive since the port and nearby city were captured after an unexpectedly fierce fight a week ago.

But if events in the nearby town of Safwan today were any guide, the boxes of rations and supplies may not bring the good will the allies hope for in their war for Iraq.

The Kuwaiti Red Crescent has trucked food into Safwan, just across the border in Iraq, twice now. And twice the Kuwaitis have been met by crowds that quickly turned into mobs desperately trying to get whatever they could while they could -- but still deeply ambivalent about whether to side with Saddam Hussein or the United States. ''You should know, America should know, that we need food and water and shoes,'' said Ahmed, 18, who noted that the town of 5,000 had been without water since the pipe supplying Safwan was damaged seven days ago.

Ahmed said he did not know what to think of America, but from what he has seen so far, he said, ''They haven't done anything for us yet.''

In loud cries, people asked for help, and in whispered tones, some tried to explain why people were not more open in their support for the Americans.

''We can't really talk about the political situation here because it is still operating,'' said a man who gave his name simply as Abu Zahra, age 32, apparently referring to the system of control maintained by Saddam Hussein over the restive Shiite population of southern Iraq.

The fedayeen soldiers loyal to Mr. Hussein still lurk in the streets and outlying areas of Safwan, he said, adding, ''They are part of us because they are our cousins and relatives, but we look at them with disgust.''

''The people here do not want to have a repeat of what they lived in '91,'' he explained, referring to the Shiite rebellion then that received no support from the United States and was then brutally repressed by Mr. Hussein. ''People have a lot of fear. They are afraid the regime will come and crush them again.''

''Saddam will win the war because his troops are in Baghdad,'' said one young man, clutching a box of food. ''He has very strong troops there.''

Indeed, British officers in Umm Qasr today said that people in this town remained distrustful and suspicious. The aid from the British ship, Sir Galahad, was delivered more as a psychological tool than a material necessity in the port city.

Three cities farther up the peninsula -- Umm Khayyal, Zubayr, and the all important second city of Iraq, Basra -- were far less secure, the British said. British soldiers are encamped on two sides of Basra, with troops loyal to Saddam Hussein continuing to operate inside the city of 1.2 million people.

The British command was considering today whether ''to wait it out'' at Basra until Baghdad fell or whether to try to take a section of the Basra in an effort to show partial control, officers at the port said.

Umm Khayyal, a town of about 30,000 people about 30 miles north of here, was captured at dawn this morning, according to Col. Buster Howes, commanding officer of the 42nd Commando, Royal Marines. But it was not entirely secure, he said, and could turn out to be a difficult place to control because of the large number of Baath Party officials there.

On the streets of Umm Qasr, known as a freewheeling port city, a faint air of normalcy was beginning to emerge, Colonel Howes said.

However, the atmosphere in town was still so brittle that the Royal Marines decided against inviting a busload of reporters and television cameramen to see things for themselves. The reporters, escorted to the port from Kuwait City by the British military to witness the arrival of the aid, were kept at the dockside and not allowed to talk to people in the town.

''People don't want to be treated as museum pieces, or to be in a goldfish bowl,'' said Col. Steve Cox, deputy commander of the Third Commando Brigade. ''When I talk to people, the word dignity comes up a lot. They don't want aid thrown at them.''

The British troops in Umm Qasr were patrolling without bulletproof vests, and with their usual soft berets instead of helmets.

A market opened in the center of town today, selling tomatoes and root vegetables. Several teachers had offered to help open one of the 18 primary schools tomorrow, British officers said. The first group of port workers -- about 50 of them -- returned to their jobs today, earning their usual 25 cents a day.

In the early hours this morning, the Marines raided 15 homes, the British said. Among those dragged from their beds, arrested and sent to a prisoner camp on the Fao peninsula was an Iraqi general, and six senior Baath Party members, Colonel Howes said. Eight of those arrested were interviewed and released, he said.

In a sign that the British were beginning to win the confidence of some of the people, the arrests were made possible with the help of local information, the officers said. The Royal Marines also captured records of the Baath party.

In fact, people in Umm Qasr had enough food for the next several months, the British soldiers said. In the weeks before the war, double rations were issued under the oil-for-food program administered by the United Nations, which is regarded by most Iraqis as dispensing what Saddam Hussein provides for them to survive.

The hospital in town, and the medical clinic, also had enough supplies. The big problem was a shortage of water, caused largely because electricity to drive the pumps, was cut. The town's electricity supply comes from Basra, they said.

A team of United States government aid experts traveled to Umm Qasr from Kuwait City Wednesday and Thursday to assess the humanitarian situation. They concurred with the British military: there was not an immediate crisis.

''We were prepared to send eight tankers, water bladders, medical kits for a population of 10,000 for three months,'' said Michael Marx, the leader of the agency's Disaster Assistance Response Teams, who are poised in Kuwait City to go into Iraq. ''We found that it was not needed.''

The people of Basra were sure to be in greater need, although there, too, people appeared to have enough food and medicines, he said. Water was short in Basra.

''We're going to see pockets of need. We're not going to see a wide humanitarian crisis,'' Mr. Marx said.

Certainly, Safwan appeared to be one of those pockets of need. When the trucks bearing aid rolled across the border from Kuwait into Safwan today, barefoot children and old women shrouded in black began to emerge from battered stone homes.

Teenage boys sprinted for their run-down Chevy and Toyota trucks to follow the food convoy. Because of the mob that swarmed the Red Crescent trucks on their first trip this week, they tried this time to move to the outskirts of town, but still, hundreds turned out.

The town of Umm Qasr, and those to the north, were believed by American and British planners to be those most likely to receive their soldiers with open arms, even scenes of jubilation. These towns were supposed to set the way for a widespread acceptance of the troops.

There were several explanations why this had not happened here. It was possible that the people, who are mostly Shiite Muslims, were put off by the zeal of a group of American marines who had briefly planted the Stars and Stripes at the port last week, portraying themselves more as occupiers than friends.

Then, the battle for the town was complicated by the tenacity of Iraqi soldiers, most of them sent specially by Baghdad to confront the coalition forces, the British officers said. In order to win the city, American troops finally called in air support against Iraqi forces.

Now, a week later, Colonel Cox said, the townspeople were still very unsure of their future.

Posters of Saddam Hussein were still hanging prominently in buildings. ''They believe Saddam will come up through the cracks in the pavement,'' he said.

But suspicions eased among some and some of the more educated people had come forward and introduced themselves to the senior British officers.

Colonel Cox said the British had established a headquarters in the office of the United Nations, and they had chosen a derelict hotel for their sleeping quarters.

Several days ago, a professor of English came by to visit. ''I told him to get his best students together,'' Colonel Cox said. ''We want to use them as interpreters.''
