A NATION AT WAR: PRESSURE ON IRAQ; U.S. REPORTS TALKS URGING SURRENDER
By Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker
March 21, 2003

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said today that allied officials had held secret talks with members of Iraq's elite Republican Guard and Special Republican Guard about defecting or surrendering.

Vowing that Saddam Hussein's ''days are numbered,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said he was encouraged by signs that the threat of an all-out American attack was prompting many Iraqi military units and their commanders to consider a cease-fire or giving up.

Hours after American missiles hit a bunker where Mr. Hussein was believed to be meeting with senior officers, United States intelligence officials said there were indications that the individual on a videotape released after the assault was Mr. Hussein, although no final analytical conclusion had been reached.

But Mr. Rumsfeld sounded certain of victory. ''There's no question that the people of Iraq and the people of the region have to know that his days are numbered -- he's not going to be there,'' he said.

''We are in communication with still more people who are officials of the military at various levels -- the regular army, the Republican Guard, the Special Republican Guard -- who are increasingly aware that it's going to happen, he's going to be gone,'' he told reporters. ''We continue to feel that there's no need for a broader conflict if the Iraqi leaders act to save themselves and to prevent such further conflict.''

After a briefing for lawmakers tonight, Mr. Rumsfeld said the United States was reaching out to Iraqi leaders and military officers with ''every conceivable mode and method.''

His comments could have been the latest example of what has been an aggressive psychological campaign aimed at putting pressure on Iraqi officers to give up.

Some senior military officials in Washington and in Kuwait expressed skepticism at the suggestion of impending mass defections, saying there was ''a lack of clarity'' to some of the intelligence reports.

The White House, seeking to counter any perception that the United States had been left diplomatically isolated by attacking Iraq, dismissed new criticism today from Russia, France, China and other nations and cited support from what it termed an ever-growing coalition.

President Bush told reporters after a cabinet meeting that more than 40 nations had expressed support for the war, a group he said backed his administration's ''deep desire for peace and freedom.'' He added, ''We are grateful for their determination, we appreciate their vision, and we welcome their support.''

But White House officials acknowledged that many of the nations had limited their support to political statements rather than military or financial help.

Late today, the administration released a list of 43 nations it said were willing to be identified publicly as coalition members. Many of them had little to offer the war effort but moral support. While the list included Afghanistan, Eritrea, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Rwanda and Uganda, only Britain and Australia have contributed sizable forces.

Mr. Bush began his day with a phone call at 6 a.m. from Condoleezza Rice, his national security adviser, who updated him on the overnight military operation. He received further details later in the morning during a meeting with Mr. Rumsfeld, and had lunch with Vice President Dick Cheney.

White House officials said Mr. Bush did not have much time to watch television reports. But they said he received periodic updates throughout the day, and briefed the cabinet about Iraq this afternoon.

Clearly concerned that his administration not forget that domestic politics were likely to return to normal once the war was over, Mr. Bush urged the cabinet to keep up pressure on Congress to pass his proposed tax cut and to address issues like education and health care.

The White House seemed intent on retaining some air of normalcy as Mr. Bush waged the second war of his presidency. He was host to the president of Cameroon for dinner tonight. Through the week, officials said, he has stuck to his regimen of daily exercise, as well as a new diet under which he is forgoing desserts. On Friday, he is scheduled to leave for Camp David for the weekend.

On Capitol Hill, Congress sought to bury the bitter divisions over Mr. Bush's handling of the Iraq conflict and rally support behind the more than 250,000 American troops now operating in the Persian Gulf region. Leading Democrats who have been critical of Mr. Bush, including Senator Tom Daschle, the minority leader, joined in supporting a resolution supporting the president and the armed forces.

The Senate resolution, approved unanimously, was written to attract the broadest possible support by referring to the leadership of the president ''as commander in chief'' and avoiding references to the administration's overall foreign policy.

In the House, where a core of Democrats remained outspoken against the war, consideration of the resolution was slowed by negotiations over the exact phrasing.

''While I support the troops, I cannot support this mission,'' said Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio and a leader of House opposition to the war.

Intelligence analysts pored over assessments of Wednesday night's bomb and missile strike against what Mr. Rumsfeld described as ''a senior Iraqi leadership compound'' in Baghdad to determine whether Mr. Hussein or any of his top aides were killed or wounded.

The airstrikes against what defense officials called a fleeting ''target of opportunity'' forced military planners to accelerate and alter the sequencing of a major part of the Pentagon's original battle plan. The strategy originally called for a huge aerial bombardment followed almost simultaneously by ground forces moving to secure targets in southern Iraq, including oil fields.

Fearing that their troops were vulnerable to Iraqi missile and artillery attack along the Kuwaiti border, allied commanders ordered lead elements of the Marine, Army and British ground force into southern Iraq today, in advance of the heavy air bombardment that had been widely expected to open the war.

''The military operation is on or ahead of schedule,'' a senior Pentagon official said. While the official said there had been ''no major changes'' to the plan, the sequence of attacks -- especially the movement of ground forces out of Kuwait -- was shifting ''to take advantage of events on the ground.''

The official said much of the American military activity remained invisible, particularly the missions of Special Operations Forces under way throughout Iraq.

Delaying the all-out air attack or, according to some Air Force officials, merely sticking to its original schedule, would give Iraqi rank and file troops and their commanders a little more time to give up without a fight, defense officials said.

''Iraqi soldiers and officers must ask themselves whether they want to die fighting for a doomed regime or do they want to survive,'' Mr. Rumsfeld told reporters. ''What will follow will not be a repeat of any other conflict. It will be of a force and scope and scale that has been beyond what has been seen before.''

Military officials said the threatened onslaught and a weeks-long psychological operations campaign were making inroads. Mr. Rumsfeld said there was ''good evidence'' that Iraqi military officials were on the verge of surrendering.

But he also acknowledged that Iraqi military officials feared for their lives if they defected or surrendered too early.

''Once they are persuaded that that regime is history, it is going, it will not be there, in some reasonably finite period of time they will be gone, then their behavior begins to tip and change,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. He gave his most specific warnings to Iraqi officials not to use chemical or biological weapons, destroy dams or flood villages, and not to follow any orders to ignite Iraq's oil fields. Violators will be punished, he said.

''Do not follow orders to destroy your country's oil, which is the Iraqi people's, and they will need it to rebuild their country when that regime is gone,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

He said there were reports that four or five oil wells were on fire, but it was unclear whether Iraqi forces had ignited them.

Seeking to stem a large refugee flow, Mr. Rumsfeld gave his most specific instructions to Iraqi civilians to stay home once war started, avoid their workplaces and stay away from military targets or places where Iraq has military equipment.

''Stay in your homes and listen to coalition radio stations for instructions on what to do to remain safe and out of the line of fire,'' he said.

Mr. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, also warned employees at the Pentagon and other agencies not to discuss classified information. Such disclosures could inadvertently imperil American forces.

''There is no excuse for anyone revealing sensitive information that will almost certainly put the lives of men and women in uniform at risk,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.
