THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq Leader Tells Associates to Be Patient As U.S. Puts Pressure on U.N. Inspectors
By John F. Burns
Dec. 6, 2002


President Saddam Hussein broke his silence today on the new United Nations weapons inspections, urging ''patience'' on his associates in the Iraqi leadership in the face of American pressures.

Referring to the threat of an American military attack if the inspections founder, he said Iraq should let the inspectors do their work so as to ''keep our people out of harm's way.''

Mr. Hussein told a meeting of about 30 top political and military leaders that the point might come when Iraq would show its ''anger'' at having to accept the inspections, which began last week and quickly extended to about 20 top-secret nuclear, biological and chemical warfare research installations, as well as one of Mr. Hussein's many palaces. The inspections were suspended today for two days for the Muslim holiday of Id al-Fitr, which follows the fasting month of Ramadan.

For now, Mr. Hussein said, Iraq should show ''our capacity for bearing.''

''Your patience, brothers and comrades, and that of the Iraqi people, is noteworthy; but your anger and revolt are also great when the situation calls for it,'' the Iraqi leader said, in a English translation provided by the government. ''However, for every situation there is an answer, for every phase there is a certain behavior, and for every action there is a reaction.''

Mr. Hussein spoke two days before the deadline Iraq has set itself, on Saturday in Baghdad, for handing over a complete and final declaration of any secret weapons programs that have continued in defiance of more than a decade of United Nations bans. The handover, a day ahead of the United Nations cutoff for the declaration, will take place under the threat of war with the United States if Iraq again seeks to deny any hidden projects or weapons.

Mr. Hussein made no reference to the declaration. Nor did he touch more than glancingly on the crunch issue -- whether Iraq will admit to having some banned weapons programs, as Mr. Bush and Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, have claimed insistently, or deny the existence of any clandestine weapons work, as other Iraqi leaders have maintained. On that issue, many believe, hangs the issue of war and peace.

In the weeks before the vote last month in which the United Nations Security Council approved the tough new inspections, many of Iraq's top leaders, though not Mr. Hussein, had argued for rejecting new inspections as an indignity forced on Iraq by President Bush. Since the inspections began nine days ago, new versions of that argument have resurfaced, propelled by fury at the no-notice search of Mr. Hussein's Al-Sajoud palace in Baghdad on Tuesday.

After the palace inspection, tensions had been rising in Baghdad as other top Iraqi leaders spoke out against the weapons inspections, and said that the United States appeared intent on using the inspections as a pretext for an attack on Iraq. Taha Yassin Ramadan, No. 3 in the Baghdad hierarchy, said on Wednesday night that if American leaders continued to second-guess the weapons inspectors and imply that they were likely to fail in their task of uncovering hidden weapons programs, ''by the American logic, war is unavoidable.''

Since the government says almost nothing on any issue without checking first with Mr. Hussein, the outbursts that followed the palace intrusion almost certainly reflected Mr. Hussein's personal sense of affront. But today, meeting with the other leaders at another palace to celebrate the Id al-Fitr holiday, the 65-year-old leader used a rambling 23-minute speech to put across one central message: that Iraq's hawks should stay calm.

The ''basis'' of Iraq's thinking in accepting the inspections, Mr. Hussein said, was to ''keep our people out of harm's way amid an international situation in which some people might claim that we didn't give the inspectors the proper chance to disprove the American allegations that Iraq produced weapons of mass destruction during the period of the inspectors' absence.''

''For that reason, we shall provide them with such a chance, after which, if the weaklings remain weak and the cowardly remain cowards, then we shall take the stand that befits our people, principles and mission,'' Mr. Hussein said. To this, he added what appeared to be an encouragement to the military commanders seated along with other leaders in an ornate palace chamber, or possibly a broader salute to the people of Iraq. ''Victory will be yours always, God willing,'' he said.

Frequent references to weakness in the speech suggested that the real struggle in accepting the inspectors might not have been within the Iraqi leadership, which has been under Mr. Hussein's iron grip since the mid-1970's, but within Mr. Hussein himself. The Iraqi leader projects himself as a man who bows to nobody, but now, as he did in withdrawing his troops helter-skelter from Kuwait in 1991, he has had to knuckle under, this time to threats of an American-led military invasion that would aim at toppling Mr. Hussein.

The speech, delivered by Mr. Hussein without a text as he sat in a large thronelike chair, had the earmarks of an exercise in public musing, as if Mr. Hussein was talking himself through all the computations he has wrestled with since President Bush began talking determinedly of military action against Iraq earlier this year. The government's transcript of the remarks, in Arabic and in English, was so diffuse and digressive in some passages it was hard to follow, as many of Mr. Hussein's speeches in recent months have been.

Mostly, it was a mixture of what Americans might call barnyard philosophy, like Mr. Hussein's observation, in arguing for a modulated response to American threats, that ''Iraqis don't like the colors falling between black and white, except in clothes, and in certain aspects of nature.'' Many passages were steeped in references to God, reflecting the Islamic character Mr. Hussein, once an assertive secularist, has projected since losing the Persian Gulf war. ''Iraq doesn't need any party to defend it, because it relies on God Almighty,'' he said.

Speaking in a quiet monotone, in a relaxed cadence that suggested a genial father figure, Mr. Hussein looked frequently to his left and right as he spoke, to sofas occupied by a group of aging men who form the ruling Revolutionary Command Council. On television, it looked almost as if he was reassuring them that he had not lost his will. ''We cast our lot with good people, and refuse to line up alongside the weaklings by making concessions to the point where we would be described as being weak, God forbid,'' he said.

The film showed Mr. Hussein wearing an immaculately tailored double-breasted suit and a blue-gray striped tie -- the only man in the room not wearing the olive-green military uniform and beret that are common to both military leaders and to top leaders of the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party.

The Iraqi leader reached often into the grab bag of bitter invective he has used against the United States in the past. Without mentioning President Bush, he spoke of ''the evil aggression'' that had no precedent, not even ''Genghis Khan,'' whose Mongol troops laid waste to Baghdad nine centuries ago; of the ''debased, criminal hegemony that is the Zionist-American alliance''; and of the ''unjust, arrogant, debased American tyranny'' that, he said, had imposed 12 years of unjust economic sanctions and bombing on Iraq since the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

With an eye to militant opinion across the Arab world, to whom he has frequently presented himself as a historic figure destined to lead Arab armies to the defeat of Israel, Mr. Hussein also invoked the Palestinian suicide bombers who have caused devastation with their attacks on Israeli targets -- to each of whose families Mr. Hussein has pledged a cash payment of $25,000. ''Lest we miss one very important thing, it is imperative that we hail the heroic people of Palestine, hailing in particular the jihadist spirit of those willing to sacrifice their lives to defend the nation, and mankind, too.''

But despite this, Mr. Hussein said, Iraq should follow what he described as the example set by their Arab ancestors from ancient history, going back to the construction of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon 2,500 years ago, and to the construction of great waterways across the plains of Mesopotamia even before that: They should stay patient in the face of great challenges, in the knowledge that there time would come -- or, as Mr. Hussein put it an another point in his speech, ''that the rock that they throw at you shall fall on their heads, God willing.''
