THREATS AND RESPONSES: STREETS OF BAGHDAD; Iraqis Cheer for Their President, But Real Mood Is Hard to Read
By John F. Burns
Oct. 15, 2002


At the floodlit Stadium of the People, the organizers of a rally today on the eve of a referendum on the presidency of Saddam Hussein had one point to make, and they made it with all the subtlety of a hammer hitting an anvil.

The message was this: when Iraqis go to vote on Tuesday, on a ballot with a single candidate and a blunt yes or no choice, and with the challenge of matching the thumping endorsement Mr. Hussein won from 99.96 percent of the voters in the last referendum in 1995, Iraq's iron-fisted leader will prove once again that he is the champion of the Iraqi people's hearts.

As a subtext, the vote will give Mr. Hussein's answer to President Bush's demand for ''regime change'' in Iraq, meaning the ouster of Mr. Hussein.

As a warm-up to a soccer game between two top Baghdad teams, 30,000 chanting, flag-waving fans were treated to a panorama of the frenzied enthusiasm that Iraq's 22 million people feel for Mr. Hussein, at least in the official telling. Parachutists descending through the dusk clutched the Iraqi leader's portraits, and ranks of men in white and red T-shirts seated high in the grandstand sketched out a heart and the single word ''yes'' in Arabic. Thousands of other spectators unfurled banners on the same relentlessly adoring theme. ''Saddam is Iraq! Iraq is Saddam!'' many said.
At a time when Mr. Bush's threat to use military force against Iraq poses a greater peril to the 65-year-old Mr. Hussein than any in his 23 years in power, it is the same wherever a traveler goes.

In dingy coffee shops in central Baghdad where old-timers gather to play dominoes, in food bazaars that shelter from the 110-degree noontime heat under ragged plastic awnings, on street corners where the impoverished middle class sell some of the last bric-a-brac from their homes, the word among the people never varies: Saddam, Saddam, Saddam, only Saddam can save Iraq, only Saddam can bring Iraqis the proud, independent, prosperous life they crave.

Those, at any rate, are the views voiced in the presence of government officials assigned to accompany visiting reporters and photographers by the Ministry of Information, a brooding building that sits beside the Tigris River with twin-barreled antiaircraft guns on the roof.

Such ''minders'' are ever present, and any newsman who tries to talk to ordinary Iraqis out of earshot of his minder is taking a serious risk, at least for the Iraqis involved. According to Western human rights reports, a generation of Iraqis have suffered severely, and even lost their lives, for voicing dissident views, especially about Mr. Hussein.

This leaves visitors searching for subtler clues to the people's mood, and they can be hard to read. But as in any closed society, the clues are always there for those who care to look -- in the rare, brief moments in elevators and hotel corridors and busy airport concourses when people are free to talk without being overheard by minders, or by anyone else; in the things people do not say, as much as in what they do; in the questions they ask of foreigners, encoding hints of their real hopes and concerns; and in the contrast between the harsh, officially sanctioned opinions people voice with monotonous predictability, and the warmth they show to visitors from the countries they condemn.
All those clues are present in Iraq, though what they mean is a matter of debate.

The first and most striking experience for visitors from the United States and Britain, the two nations that have led the campaign for Iraq to open up to unfettered weapons inspections or face military attack, is that Iraqis remain extraordinarily friendly. There are a few exceptions, mostly among senior government and army officials, who feel most threatened.

To be asked your nationality, and to answer American or British, is to hear the same response again and again: ''America good,'' ''Britain good,'' often accompanied by raised thumbs, a broad smile and a wrist-wrenching handshake.

Then there are the questions people ask, usually when minders are momentarily distracted or absent. Among the most common is whether Mr. Bush is serious in threatening war to topple Mr. Hussein. Sometimes, this is accompanied by references to events in 1991, when the first President Bush halted military operations just inside Iraq as soon as its occupying forces were withdrawn from Kuwait, overruling hard-liners in his administration who favored driving on to Baghdad.

That decision, and his failure to support uprisings among Shiites in southern Iraq and Kurds in the north that followed, left deep scars on the memories of Iraqis who believed that Iraq was on the verge of a government change.

Beyond this, two other questions are commonly asked: When will President Bush attack, if he does; and how long will it last?

The frame of reference, again, is 1991, when American bombing caused widespread civilian casualties.

Many Iraqis outflank the heavily censored fare of the state-controlled media by tuning in to shortwave radio transmissions in Arabic and Kurdish by the Voice of America and the BBC, and they have learned that 90 percent of the ordnance dropped by American aircraft in Afghanistan consisted of ''smart bombs,'' with a high degree of accuracy, compared with a figure of only 10 percent in Iraq in 1991. But they worry that a new round of bombing could cause heavy civilian losses.
Another notable feature of conversations with Iraqis is that they only rarely offer any condemnation of the United States or Britain, or any personal vilification of Mr. Bush or Prime Minister Tony Blair, unless they are asked questions that invite such condemnation. Then they respond in terms strikingly similar to the diatribes that run daily on the state-run television and radio, or in the government-controlled newspapers: Mr. Bush, they say, is lying about Iraq's trying to acquire nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, and in his allegations that Mr. Hussein, as Mr. Bush put it last week, uses ''murder as a tool of terror.''

Another hint of what may be going in people's minds is that merchants in the bazaars say there has been no rush by customers to build up stocks of food, as there was immediately before the American bombing began in January 1991. Iraqis say one principal reason for this is a widespread understanding of the diplomatic timetable that, for now at least, is guiding Washington's decisions, with talks continuing at the United Nations to determine when, and if, weapons inspectors will come to Iraq. Another reason is simply a shortage of money among people whose living standards, once among the highest in the Arab world, have sunk to penury for millions.

Supporters of an American and British strike might see in those and other hints some suggestion that ordinary Iraqis yearn to be freed, in the way that Afghans were liberated from the Taliban. But, it has to be said, whole notebooks full of conversations with Iraqis, in the presence of minders, suggest just the opposite, at least on a literal reading of the words.

One conversation typical of dozens of others in recent days, in the way in which it closely paralleled state propaganda, but always with an elaborate courtesy, was with Fadil Ahmed, a 58-year-old diabetes sufferer who retired as the head of a state-owned trucking company when surgeons amputated his leg.

Mr. Ahmed is a Kurd, member of a restive ethnic group that has suffered grievously in armed crackdowns by Mr. Hussein, and who now, under the protection of American and British warplanes, and to the fury of Baghdad, rule three provinces of northern Iraq as an autonomous mini-state.

So what did Mr. Ahmed, encountered on Sunday in the Sham's Casino coffee shop in central Baghdad, make of Mr. Hussein's leadership, and of the American and British threats to end it? The white-haired retiree pushed his wheelchair a little closer, summoned a fresh cup of sugary Turkish coffee for his questioner, and offered a wan smile.

''This is nothing to do with President Bush.'' he said. ''It's up to the Iraqi people to decide who should rule them. And all of the Iraqi people are supporting our president because he is a man of justice, and because he gives the Iraqi people everything they need.''

As for Mr. Bush's assertion that Iraqis live in fear, he added: ''Who are Americans to lecture us about fear? Didn't I hear on the radio this morning that there is a sniper wandering around in Washington, D.C., killing people at random? Is that what Americans call living without fear?''
W