THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ; DEFIANT RESPONSE
By John F. Burns
March 20, 2003

Iraqi television broadcast a speech by a defiant Saddam Hussein this morning, a few hours after the first blasts on Baghdad. In it, he exhorted his people to ''draw your swords'' against invaders and referred to the United States government as ''criminals'' and ''Zionists.''

''God willing, we will take them to the limit where they lose their patience and any hope to achieve what they have planned and what the Zionist criminals have pushed them to do,'' he said. It was unclear whether the address had been recorded previously.

According to one translation, he said, ''The criminal little Bush has committed a crime against humanity.'' Another had him referring to ''Junior Bush.''

The broadcast came in the lull after a strike on the city just before dawn. Beginning at about 5:35 this morning, bombs exploded, answered by anti-aircraft fire and what sounded like machine-gun fire, mingled with a muezzin's call from one of the city's many mosques and the rush-hour sounds of cars racing over the highway, heading away from town in an apparent attempt to escape American fire.

Apparently fashioned to mark the bombing, the muezzin's call consisted of a plaintive 10 minutes of ''Allah-u Akbar,'' or ''God is great,'' over and over.

This morning the waiting was over, just hours after President Bush's 48-hour ultimatum to Saddam Hussein elapsed. As it ticked down Wednesday, there was only one question that waiters, masons, vegetable sellers, physicians, government clerks and an endless roll call of other anxious Iraqis put to any foreigner:

''America, what time?'' they asked. ''Bush, what time?''

After nearly 30 years of living under Saddam Hussein, Iraqis in every walk of life, at every age, at every level of competence in English and in every corner of this capital had their minds transfixed by when, precisely, the clock would run down for Mr. Hussein and the totalitarian system of government he has built here on a model he took from Stalin.

When, exactly, would American bombs and missiles sent to topple him begin striking targets here?

Wednesday's passage into night was punctuated by desperate appeals for information that would help people decide when to leave their jobs, when to go to their basements, when to embrace their families and when to make their most impassioned appeals to a merciful God.

In many of these questions lurked a certain eagerness for a war that might unseat Mr. Hussein.

But as war neared, the extraordinary friendliness with which Iraqis faced with an American-led military attack have continued to greet visitors, especially from the United States and Britain, was offset by isolated incidents that confirmed that for some people here, America truly is the Great Satan, as Mr. Hussein called it during the Persian Gulf war.

At a traffic light, one man in uniform, spotting Westerners waiting in a vehicle beside him, pulled a Kalashnikov rifle from the seat beside him and snapped a fully loaded magazine sharply into its breech before roaring away. Here and there, other foreigners reported being spat at.

In several neighborhoods with potential military targets, Iraqis reported that pits had been dug and filled with heavy-grade oil, to be set afire to cast a pall of smoke to slow attacks from the air and ground and to choke American troops.

In some areas of the city that are home to senior officials or the site of strategic buildings, Iraqis said, sandbagged bunkers had been dug every 100 yards or so, some holding anti-aircraft guns, the bigger ones with ground-to-air missiles.

Other actions reflected concerns of a more personal kind. Hospitals reported that they had cleared their wards of all but emergency and chronic cases to make way for casualties. Expectant mothers were scheduled for Caesarean births to reduce birthing time.

Lines at gasoline stations stretched around the block. Residents everywhere were in a last-minute rush to buy provisions, and many found, with most neighborhood shops shuttered, that they had waited too long to buy more canned food, bottled water, candles, flashlights, car batteries and plastic containers.

For much of the day the impression was of a government in a state of advanced meltdown, at least in its civilian ministries. At the Information Ministry, government minders assigned to reporters only days ago in a toughening-up measure that brought in hard-faced men from the intelligence services were suddenly gone.

Many ministries were emptied of computers, filing cabinets and anything else that could constitute a revealing record of aspects of Mr. Hussein's rule that powerful people might not want falling into American hands.

A deep-rooted fear was palpable, a fear of being obliterated in an Armageddon deployed by the world's greatest military power.

While people here are among the world's leading experts on the capabilities of America's ''smart'' weapons from their experiences in the 38-day air campaign that accompanied the war to oust Mr. Hussein from Kuwait in 1991 and from four days of similar attacks in 1998, they know, too, that the cleverest weapons and the best-trained pilots can make mistakes.

By some estimates, perhaps 3,000 Iraqi civilians were killed in errant bombing strikes in 1991, a loss that still constitutes a deep wound in the Iraqi mind.

But many who approached with questions about the timing made it plain that their apprehension was mixed with at least an equal measure of anticipation.

One man lingering in the dark outside the information ministry, watching high-ranking intelligence officials talking on the sidewalk nearby, puffed nervously on his cigarette and asked a Western reporter whether the attack would come during the night, on or near Mr. Bush's deadline.

Told that it might come hours or even days later, the man shook his head and groaned. ''Too much time, too much time,'' he said.

Similar encounters punctuated the day, as Iraqis made it plain that the forthcoming American assault, whatever it might bring in terms of casualties and material damages, was, for them, the price that had to be paid to move the country beyond the years of suffering under Mr. Hussein.

What no outsider could say is how widespread these feelings are compared with Iraqis who support Mr. Hussein or who favor his demise but not by an America that is widely criticized here and in many places loathed for policies that are seen as hostile to Arabs.

That these reservations -- these hatreds, to listen to Iraqi leaders -- are widespread, too, is beyond doubting for anyone who has spent months talking to Iraqis. Such conversations inevitably turn to the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, to American support for Mr. Hussein in the 1980's when his brutalities against his own people were already well chronicled, to American backing for corrupt and authoritarian regimes elsewhere in the Arab world and to a host of other topics from globalization to oil.

The one thing that seemed beyond doubt was that the anxieties about casualties ran through every neighborhood and every street.

In the middle-class district of Amiriya, the family of one well-placed official in the hierarchy of the ruling Baath Party showed alarmed neighbors the drills that party officials had been put through for surviving chemical weapons attacks, a transfixing nightmare for all Iraqis ever since Mr. Hussein ordered their use against Kurds and Iranians during the Iran-Iraq war of the 1980's. Thousands died in those attacks, the worst of their kind since the European battlefields of World War I.

The neighbors who recounted the drills said that the wife of the party official had showed them how to sniff the air for the telltale scent of bananas and how to cut strips of gauze, moisten them, then hold them against eyes, nose and mouth.

What was not clear from the whispered account given by the neighbors was whether the woman demonstrating the procedure was acting on any insider's knowledge of Mr. Hussein's plans for dealing with domestic uprisings or the approach of American troops or acting solely on party briefings dating from Iraq's grim past.

In much of the city, the notable thing in the past 10 days has been how scant the defensive preparations have been.

Even in the heart of the government quarter, on the west bank of the Tigris River, where Mr. Hussein's taste for massive architecture has spawned vast monuments and office buildings that seem modeled on Hitler's plans for an imperial Berlin, the most visible defenses have been the shoulder-high, sandbagged bunkers that have sprung up at traffic intersections.

At nightfall on Wednesday, those bunkers were suddenly manned for the first time, mostly by men with no other armament than Kalashnikov rifles, providing resistance to internal uprisings but no challenge to American air power.