A NATION AT WAR: THE ATTACK; ALLIES CONFRONT BAGHDAD DEFENDERS; IRAQIS REPEL COPTERS; ONE GOES DOWN
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 25, 2003

Having swept over more than 300 miles of sand and mud in southern Iraq, American forces gathered themselves south of Baghdad today, flinging artillery fire and attack helicopters against the Republican Guard, the outer ring of Saddam Hussein's defenses of Baghdad.

But a curtain of fire from small arms and machine guns that was described as a ''hornet's nest'' drove back the airborne force of 32 Apache helicopters seeking Iraqi tanks, and one of the aircraft went down in a farmer's field.

Its two crewmen -- identified by the Pentagon as Chief Warrant Officer Ronald D. Young Jr., 26, of Georgia and Chief Warrant Officer David S. Williams, 30, of Florida -- were listed as missing in action.

But Iraqi state television said the two men had been captured and ran video of them, wearing khaki overalls. The two men remained silent.
Nearly all the gunships sustained damage, and military commanders said they were disappointed in their initial failure to destroy the entrenched Iraqi forces from the air.

In a day of regrouping and a possible shift in strategy to take on the Medina Republican Guard Division's armor from safer altitudes, allied forces tonight unleashed a heavy aerial bombardment on targets south of Baghdad. [Map, Page B16.]

Mr. Hussein appeared on state television today and, in a defiant and angry speech, exhorted his Baath Party loyalists, his security forces and the fanatical irregular forces known as fedayeen to ''hit your enemy with all your strength.''

''The enemy is trapped in the sacred land of Iraq,'' he said. ''Wherever they encroach, they are trapped in our land, leaving the desert behind them, and find Iraqi citizens surrounding them and shooting at them.''

Iraq appears to be pursuing a military strategy of concentrating its forces in cities, where they are less immediately vulnerable to superior allied firepower. Tariq Aziz, the deputy prime minister, appeared buoyant today during a news conference in Baghdad while describing the results of the day's battles.

After a weekend marked by some setbacks, senior Bush administration officials and Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, asserted that the military campaign was making progress to secure Iraq's oil supplies and prepare for the provision of aid. Seven oil wells in a field of 400 remained on fire today. The leaders said they were doing everything they could to minimize civilian suffering.

With the allied troops now within 100 miles of Baghdad, Mr. Blair told the House of Commons in London, ''This will plainly be a crucial moment.'' But big sandstorms, predicted over the next several days, could delay the prosecution of the war.

Mr. Blair disclosed that ''allied forces are also advancing on Al Kut,'' about 105 miles east of Baghdad. His statement indicated for the first time that the assault on Baghdad could develop along two fronts, one from the Euphrates in the west, and another along the Tigris from the southeast.

Fresh concerns were expressed today by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell that Mr. Hussein might resort to chemical weapons attacks as allied armies approach Baghdad. Up to now, no such weapons have been found in depots or other military installations taken by allied troops.

The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, expressed alarm that an allied cordon of mostly British troops thrown around Iraq's largest southern city, Basra, might provoke a ''humanitarian disaster'' for the 1.5 million people living there.

With electricity and water supplies sharply reduced over the past three days, Mr. Annan admonished Washington and London that ''it is the occupying power that has the responsibility for the welfare of the people.'' The city of Basra, apart from its airport, remains in Iraqi hands.

British commanders in charge of the Basra sector appeared frustrated that they had been unable to orchestrate a peaceful entry into the city. Two Royal Marines were reported missing in the fighting.

There were problems elsewhere. Between Basra and Baghdad, 5,000 marines battled to establish control of Nasiriya, the scene of intense fighting and ambushes on Sunday that left at least 10 Americans dead and as many as 16 missing.

Control of the Euphrates River crossroads and its highway bridges is vital to supporting and provisioning the army that raced over them toward Baghdad over the weekend.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the commander of allied forces in the region, said the failure of Iraqi army units to surrender en masse, the tenacious fighting by small units of fedayeen guerrillas, and the ambushes that resulted in 80 casualties on Sunday were an expected part of the campaign. ''I guess I would say that I actually have seen no surprise here,'' General Franks, dressed in desert fatigues, told reporters at his headquarters in Qatar. ''And I think that our people on the ground have not seen a surprise.'' Other military officials, however, suggested that the sharp ripostes from Iraqi forces had by no means been entirely expected.

In the Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq today, a United States Marine officer, Maj. Gen. Henry P. Osman, appeared in the city of Salahuddin and announced that he would coordinate aid for refugees. The move was seen as an attempt to keep Turkey from deploying military forces into border areas. American Special Forces troops have begun deploying in the enclave.

At the same time, allied bombers struck more Iraqi targets in northern Iraq, hitting Mosul, Kirkuk and Tikrit, Mr. Hussein's ancestral home.

In a day of 1,000 air sorties, there was at least one significant mistake.

The Pentagon acknowledged that a bombing mission against Ratab bridge, 80 miles from the Syrian border, went awry when a pilot released his guided bombs too late to see a civilian bus near the target.

One bomb struck the bus, which was carrying 46 civilian workers, many of them Syrians fleeing the war zone. At least five were killed and another 10 were injured.

The Syrian Foreign Ministry summoned the British and American ambassadors in Damascus and labeled the attack a ''criminal act.'' Pentagon officials expressed regret over the unintended loss of life.

At the White House, President Bush made a different kind of protest in a telephone call to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. The president complained that Russian defense companies have been selling antitank missiles, night vision equipment and electronic jamming systems to Iraq.

The jamming systems are designed to interfere with the global positioning guidance of cruise missiles, more than 600 of which have been fired against targets in Iraq.

''It's the kind of equipment that will put our young men and women in harm's way,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told a television interviewer. The White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said that Mr. Bush had noted Mr. Putin's pledge to ''look into it.''

''President Bush said he looked forward to hearing the results,'' Mr. Fleischer added.

For his part, Mr. Putin reiterated his opposition to Mr. Bush's decision to go to war in Iraq and ''underlined the need to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe in the region,'' a Kremlin statement said.

American and British forces are under intense pressure to head off such a disaster, but a number of factors are working against them. Mine clearing in the channel that approaches the port at Umm Qasr was expected to take several more days, holding back the arrival of a British aid ship, the Sir Galahad, anchored off southern Kuwait.

Moreover, sporadic fighting continues around Umm Qasr, where the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit is trying to provide security for port operations to begin.

''I'm not going to allow ships into a dangerous port area whilst there is still fighting going on,'' the British defense secretary, Geoff Hoon, told reporters in London. ''Nor are we going to take ships into a waterway that has been heavily mined.''

But Mr. Powell, speaking in an interview with Fox News, expressed satisfaction with the progress of the military campaign, and observed that the allies thus far had faced ''pockets of resistance'' and nothing more.

He endorsed the strategy of bypassing as many cities as possible so as to ''not get yourself tied down fighting street by street in those cities,'' though the scenes from Nasiriya today suggested that urban combat would be unavoidable at times.

Iraqis watched the battle for their country unfold, many trying to balance their fear of Mr. Hussein with the promises of ''liberation'' written on leaflets dropped from the sky by an invading army. Some in Nasiriya said they were disappointed with the conduct of American troops.

Rumors that the allies were about to take over Iraqi television and radio and begin broadcasting a new set of messages to the Iraqi people faded for the moment.
