
THREATS AND RESPONSES: WASHINGTON; REBUFFING 2 ALLIES, U.S. PUSHES DEMAND THAT IRAQ DISARM
By Todd S. Purdum
Jan. 24, 2003

Despite the deepest diplomatic rift in decades with some major European allies, a parade of top Bush administration officials closed ranks today and demanded in closely parallel speeches and statements that Saddam Hussein give up all weapons of mass destruction. They insisted that the United States would not have to act alone if war should be needed to force him to do so.

''I don't think we'll have to worry about going it alone,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said at a meeting here with Foreign Secretary Jack Straw of Britain, Washington's most stalwart ally, brushing aside renewed opposition to a war from France and Germany.

As resistance to military action appeared to harden among members of the United Nations Security Council, a senior administration official acknowledged that the United States did not now have the votes to force a second Council resolution explicitly authorizing an attack, and Mr. Powell said it was ''an open question'' whether to seek one.

The top administration officials -- whatever their previous stance -- argued that it was up to Iraq to turn over its weapons to United Nations inspectors and not the job of the inspectors to ferret them out or find a ''smoking gun.'' They warned that Mr. Hussein was balking and that time was running out.

Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, in a speech to the Council on Foreign Relations in Manhattan, said ''we know from multiple sources that Saddam has ordered that any scientist who cooperates'' in interviews with the inspectors ''will be killed, as well as their families.'' [Excerpts, Page A11.]

A top Iraqi official said today that scientists had refused to be interviewed, rejecting a central United Nations demand. Mr. Wolfowitz said Mr. Hussein was making no serious effort to disarm, unlike regimes in South Africa, the Ukraine and Kazakhstan, which gave up their nuclear weapons in the 1990's in response to international pressure. No sooner had he spoken than Hans Blix, a chief United Nations weapons inspector, also cited South Africa in unflattering contrast to Iraq, hinting at the thrust of the report on Iraqi compliance that he is to deliver next week.

It was another day of sharp oratory and continued military buildup in the Persian Gulf region, as Australia announced that it was sending an unspecified number of troops, including special forces and an air reconnaissance team in advance of possible deployment of fighter planes, plus a transport ship .

In a speech on foreign policy at Georgetown University, Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who is running for president, earned loud applause when he sharply criticized the Bush administration for failing to win broader international support for possible military action.

''I say to the president, show respect for the process of international diplomacy because it is not only right, it can make American stronger,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Mr. President, do not rush to war.''

But the White House press secretary, Ari Fleischer, said, ''The president is confident that Europe will heed the call.'' He drew a distinction between France and Germany and other nations from Eastern Europe to Spain, Italy, Australia and Britain. He added that it would be ''entirely possible for good friends to stay on the sidelines,'' and said Mr. Bush was ''respectful'' of the posture of France and Germany.

French and German leaders reacted sharply to Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's blunt dismissal of them on Wednesday as part of ''old Europe'' and as ''problems'' in handling the crisis over Iraq. The German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, said, ''Our position is not a problem; it is a constructive contribution.''

In fact, the French and German opposition appeared to be causing considerable problems for President Bush with some veto-holding members of the Security Council, including China and Russia.

In a telephone call, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia told Mr. Bush that next week's scheduled report from United Nations arms inspectors should provide the ''main criteria'' in deciding what to do next, the Kremlin said. Russia's foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, told reporters in Athens: ''There is no serious reason for the start of a military attack on Iraq. We hope that no country will take single action outside United Nations decisions.''

In Turkey, diplomats from six of Iraq's neighbors issued a two-page declaration calling on Baghdad to cooperate more fully with United Nations inspectors to avoid ''another war and all its devastating consequences.''

In Congress, where Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Powell held a closed-door session in the Senate on the Iraq situation, the defense secretary told reporters who chased him down a corridor that his remarks would not have any effect on European-American relations, and added: ''At my age, old is a term of endearment.'' His senior aides said that Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks were not premeditated, but came in response to a reporter's broad assertion that ''a lot of Europeans'' gave the benefit of the doubt to Iraq.

Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, sought to soften Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks, saying the United States had no plans to break its alliances.

''These are the people that we do so many things with every day -- fighting terrorism, cooperating in NATO, economic cooperation, air traffic, everything under the sun,'' Mr. Boucher said. ''We have differences on some issues sometimes, but these are our allies, and we're not pulling back from them, nor they from us.''

Experts and diplomats said Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks seemed intended to show reluctant allies that the United States was capable of waging war against Iraq without the support of major NATO allies. But those experts warned that European allies would be needed to help provide troops and money to rebuild Iraq after a war.

American officials took pains to note that negotiations had not even begun at the United Nations on a possible second resolution or other action, and said they expected no concrete action before Mr. Bush meets with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain at Camp David at the end of next week.

But they made it clear that after weeks of circling the question, the United States had rejected the desire of most Security Council members for more time to allow weapons inspections to go forward. ''Sooner, rather than later, Council members are going to have to address the consequences of Iraqi noncompliance,'' a senior official said, adding that the administration would not view the lack of Council approval as a decisive constraint.

Mr. Powell, who was the chief advocate for taking the administration's case to the United Nations last fall, again signaled his own growing impatience. In an interview on Tuesday, he said: ''The question isn't how much longer do you need for the inspections to work. Inspections will not work.''

Today, Mr. Powell said, ''Let's not lose sight that the issue is the disarmament of Iraq, not how much more time the inspectors need, but how much more time we should give Iraq when they have not used the time they've already been given to do what is required of them, and that is to disarm.''

Mr. Wolfowitz, long one of the administration's most vocal advocates for military action against Iraq, made an almost identical warning in his speech, declaring: ''The decision on whether Iraq's weapons of mass terror will be dismantled voluntarily, or whether it will have to be done by force, is not up to us or to the U.N. The decision rests entirely with Saddam Hussein. So far, he has not made the fundamental decision to disarm, and unless he does, the threat posed by his weapons programs will remain with us, and indeed, will grow.''

Referring to the inspections now under way, Mr. Wolfowitz used a business metaphor to make his case.

''When an auditor discovers discrepancies in the books, it is not the auditor's obligation to prove where the embezzler has stashed his money,'' he said. ''It is up to the person or institution being audited to explain the discrepancy.''

In Moscow, Mr. Powell's deputy, Richard L. Armitage, who has long sounded notes of caution about any military campaign, said on a Russian radio broadcast that ''there is sufficient authority to move now without a second resolution'' from the United Nations. Speaking on Echo Moscow radio, he said ''no decision has been made yet to attack Iraq,'' but added, ''It is time for Saddam Hussein to finally come clean and disarm.''

After the Senate briefing this afternoon, Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, said he intended to discuss the need for the United States to share more of its intelligence with the inspectors.
