THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.N. INSPECTORS CAN RETURN UNCONDITIONALLY, IRAQ SAYS
By Julia Preston and Todd S. Purdum
Sept. 17, 2002

Iraq, responding to worldwide pressure after President Bush demanded that it comply with United Nations resolutions, said today that it would allow international weapons inspectors to return ''without conditions.''

Secretary General Kofi Annan announced Baghdad's decision here after receiving a letter this afternoon from the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, and credited Mr. Bush and pressure from Arab leaders for Iraq's apparent change of heart. [Text, Page A16.]

''I believe the president's speech galvanized the international community,'' Mr. Annan said, referring to Mr. Bush's speech at the United Nations on Thursday. It prompted demands from a host of nations for Iraq to readmit the inspectors, who were withdrawn in December 1998, just before the United States and Britain began bombing Iraq for violation of Security Council resolutions.

Mr. Annan said Baghdad had agreed to ''immediate discussions'' to work out the logistics for weapons inspection teams to start work in Iraq. It was not clear when the inspectors could actually return.

The Bush administration and Britain voiced skepticism about the Iraqi offer. Administration officials said the United States was still determined to seek a strong resolution demanding Iraqi compliance with past resolutions and threatening to act if Baghdad failed to do so.

Iraq's offer followed signs of mounting military pressure. Administration officials said today that British and American warplanes were bombing major air defenses there while patrolling no-flight zones. In addition, there was continuing pressure on the Security Council from Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to demand Iraq's full cooperation with renewed weapons inspections.

''This is a tactical step by Iraq in hopes of avoiding strong U.N. Security Council action,'' said Scott McClellan, the deputy White House spokesman. ''As such, it is a tactic that will fail.'' He added: ''It is time for the Security Council to act.''

A senior State Department official said Iraq's letter was ''not a promise to disarm, not a promise to allow unfettered inspections, not a promise to disclose the state of its weapons program.''

The Iraqi decision was announced here after President Saddam Hussein held a third closed meeting in as many days with top officials of his government in Baghdad. He appeared to be trying to undercut both the American campaign for strong United Nations action and a surge of international criticism of his government since Mr. Bush's speech.

Secretary Powell, pressing ahead with the American proposals for swift action, met today with officials from Syria, Colombia and Mexico, all nations that sit on the Council this year, as well as with representatives of Turkey and Egypt.

The United States clashed today with France, one of its closest allies, over how the Security Council should proceed, as Paris insisted on a two-stage approach that would postpone any threat of military action for several weeks at least. France was calling for a first resolution by the Council demanding unfettered inspections, to be followed later by a measure backing the use of force, depending on Iraq's response.

Mr. Annan credited the Arab League, and particularly its secretary general, Amr Moussa of Egypt, with ''strenuous efforts'' that persuaded Mr. Hussein to relent on his ban of the inspectors.

Iraq's change of position was set in motion on Saturday morning, when Mr. Annan went to a closed meeting of Arab League ministers here to appeal for help in persuading Iraq to allow the inspectors to return. ''Governments are discussing war and peace,'' Mr. Annan said, urging Arab nations to help prevent another military conflict in the Middle East.

Governments across the Arab world then began to call on Baghdad to yield on the inspectors.

The inspectors work in two teams. One, which investigates for evidence that Iraq has biological and chemical weapons and long-range missiles that are prohibited, is based in New York and headed by Hans Blix. The inspectors who will hunt for signs of a nuclear weapons program are based in Vienna in the Iraq action team of the International Atomic Energy Agency, headed by Jacques Baute. Both team leaders have said they are ready to begin work in Iraq as soon as the logistical arrangements for their communications, transportation, laboratories and lodging there can be arranged.

Mr. Hussein's move seemed likely to deepen the dispute over tactics between the United States and France. Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin, forcefully arguing France's position at a midday news conference, outlined a plan for an initial Council resolution that would only require Iraq to allow the weapons inspections without spelling out any consequences if Baghdad does not comply.

France, one of the five permanent, veto-bearing members of the Council, wants to hold off until later a resolution to authorize the use of military force, depending on how the weapons inspections proceed.

The French plan runs counter to the proposal that Secretary Powell advocated in a day of continual meetings and intense lobbying here. Administration officials said they were seeking one resolution that would both require Iraq's complete cooperation for the inspections and also refer to the consequences of noncompliance, leaving Washington wide leeway to decide if and when to begin a military assault on Iraq.

''We cannot go for two hares at the same time,'' Mr. de Villepin said, referring to the two proposed resolution elements that are in dispute. ''We should look for one, and we get one. If we look for two, we won't catch any one.''He argued that the resolution should focus tightly on stopping Iraq's violations of Security Council measures to curb weapons proliferation, and not range into suggestions of overthrowing Mr. Hussein.

Referring to the war to oust the Taliban from Afghanistan, he warned that Iraq ''is not as easy as other targets'' for a military operation. He also said an attack on Mr. Hussein could inflame public opinion in the Arab world if it is not seen as having the support of the full Security Council.

France said it could persuade the Council to adopt unanimously the first resolution it is proposing.

An administration official argued that the two resolutions would give Mr. Hussein ''two opportunities to further embarrass the United Nations.''

Before word of the Iraqi offer arrived, American officials said they hoped to begin detailed talks in the Security Council by Wednesday, with the goal of circulating draft language of a resolution by week's end.

Britain's Foreign Secretary, Jack Straw, said today after a meeting with Russia's Foreign Minister, Igor S. Ivanov, that they were in agreement about Iraq's violations of Council edicts and also on the need to warn Baghdad of ''serious consequences'' for those breaches. His comments suggested that both permanent members of the Council would support the single, strong resolution that Washington is proposing.

However, late today Mr. Ivanov welcomed Iraq's agreement for the unconditional return of the arms inspectors, saying that the possibility of military action had been avoided, the Interfax news agency reported Tuesday.

Diplomats said Iraq's gesture to receive the weapons inspectors could slow the pace of events more than Washington has intended. Once they are on the ground, the inspectors will be governed by a specific timetable set out in Council resolution 1284, which reorganized the inspections program in 1999.

Under the terms of that resolution, the inspectors, once on the ground, would have to report back to the Security Council within 60 days to lay out a work plan, identifying lines of investigation they want to pursue. The resolution then gives them six months to reach preliminary conclusions about whether Iraq is developing prohibited weapons.

Administration officials have said they would like to get authorization from both the United Nations and from Congress to begin a military operation before the end of the year absent proof that Iraq is not developing weapons of mass destruction. Iraq agreed under the terms that ended the Persian Gulf war in 1991 that it would destroy any such weapons and submit to international inspections to ensure compliance.

The biological and chemical weapons team based in New York has a staff of 63 experts of 27 nationalities. All are fully trained and briefed about Iraq's past weapons programs, based on information gathered by earlier teams.

About 200 more trained experts are on call so they can be put to work within a matter of weeks. The program is generously financed, receiving eight-tenths of 1 percent of the revenues from Iraq's oil sales, which are monitored by the United Nations.

The Iraq action team for nuclear inspections in Vienna now includes about 16 members, Mr. Baute said recently, adding that he planned to expand it by about five experts when it came time to return to Iraq.
