THREATS AND RESPONSES: COMMERCE; Kurds Say a Turkish Crackdown on an Illegal Fuel Trade With Iraq Is Aimed at Them
By Dexter Filkins
Nov. 29, 2002

For years, this clamorous outpost on the Iraqi border thrived on the illegal trade in diesel fuel that is still formally prohibited by the United Nations.

But now, row after row of fuel trucks stand empty on the roadside, while throngs of young men mill about, puzzling over the mysterious turnabout by Turkey's leaders, who long had allowed the illegal trade to flourish.

''This was a decision taken by governments above our own heads,'' said Tahir Yuce, an idled truck driver who once supported his 9 children and 21 other members of his extended family on the money his trips into Iraq brought home. ''We really can't know what is the reason for this.''

With the threat of war in the region looming, the Turkish government reversed its longstanding policy, throwing hundreds of local drivers out of work. Turkish officials said they had decided to stanch the flow of cheap Iraqi diesel fuel because of an oversupply at home that was hurting local suppliers.

 

But Iraqi Kurdish leaders and local businessmen contend that Turkish officials had something else in mind. The diesel sales were enriching the leaders of the Kurdish Democratic Party inside Iraq, providing millions of dollars to set up a functioning public administration through large stretches of northern Iraq.

The Kurdish group is one of the most formidable opponents of Saddam Hussein. But it also poses a potential nightmare for Turkish officials, who fear that Mr. Hussein's overthrow could prompt Iraqi Kurds to declare independence and revive similar desires among Kurds in Turkey. The Turks battled their own Kurdish insurgency in the 1990's, and they are wary of anything that might revive those passions inside the country.

So, Kurdish leaders say, Turkish officials ordered the trade halted, depriving the Kurdish party of millions in revenue for its fledgling government. One Kurdish leader said that Turkish officials cracked down on the diesel exports when the Kurdish group refused to limit its political demands in the event that Mr. Hussein is overthrown.

''Already we are politically independent, and I think the Turkish government is worried that we are becoming economically independent as well,'' the Kurdish official said.

A Western diplomat in Ankara, while declining to discuss the matter publicly, suggested that the Kurdish concerns were well founded.

The decision by the Turks to ban diesel imports, which has been in place for months, appears to have been motivated almost entirely by political self-interest: at the same border crossing point, the Turkish government allows dozens of tankers to import Iraqi crude oil each day, despite the fact that it is also banned under the sanctions imposed by the United Nations from the Persian Gulf war era. Kurdish officials say the Kurdish party earns only a small amount of revenue from crude.

Indeed, Turkey's decision to cut off the flow of diesel fuel parts the curtains, if only for a moment, on the extraordinary diplomatic maneuvering that is unfolding across the region as leaders prepare for a possible American-led attack on Iraq. It also highlights the erratic approach of the countries in the region toward enforcing the sanctions, even though these governments claim to support the American-led effort to stop Mr. Hussein from acquiring nuclear, biological or chemical weapons.

In the decade after the United Nations imposed economic penalties on Iraq at the close of the gulf war, the border crossing at Habur often enjoyed boom times. Turkey may have been a member of the coalition that defeated Mr. Hussein, and it may be a member of NATO, but there was oil to be sold and money to be made. Like other governments in the region, Turkey averted its gaze as its tankers drove in and out of Iraq. At Habur, Turkey's lone crossing point into Iraq, the trade in illegal crude oil and diesel fuel was once worth as much as $600 million a year.

The illegal oil trade on the Turkish border was thought to be putting as much as $120 million a year into the hands of Mr. Hussein, who might be expected to use the money to support his efforts to acquire unconventional weapons.

The Americans raised objections, a Western diplomat said, but did not try to force the issue. Turkey is an important American ally, and its leaders often point out that the sanctions have punished it disproportionately.

The diesel truckers say that they have not been able to drive their trucks across the border for a year, but Turkish officials say they did not formally impose the ban on diesel imports until September.

The Turkish officials said the decision was entirely an economic one, motivated by Turkey's depressed economy, which is mired in its worst slump in years. The gray market diesel fuel that entered the country through Habur was undercutting suppliers at home, officials said, and they pressured the Turkish government to end the trade.

''The decision was made purely for commercial reasons,'' said Yusuf Buluc, deputy under secretary for foreign affairs. ''There is an excess of diesel fuel in Turkey. There is no point in allowing that material to come in.''

But the decision appears to have been rather selective, in that the Turkish government continues to allow the importation of crude oil at the same border crossing.

A Turkish official said that as much as 6,000 tons of crude oil come out of Iraq at Habur every day, and insisted that the crude oil trade was allowed under the United Nations penalties. But a United Nations official charged with monitoring the sanctions noted that there were only two ports where Iraqi oil may be sold legally: Al Bakr in the Persian Gulf and Ceyhan in Turkey, where the oil comes in by pipeline.

The flow of oil out of Iraq in violation of the sanctions has long been a frustration to American officials. Even now, with a possible war on the horizon, Iraqi oil is flowing into Syria, where a pipeline is believed to carry as much as 200,000 barrels of Iraqi crude across the border each day.

On a recent afternoon in Habur, the line of trucks waiting to go into Iraq to pick up crude oil stretched for two miles.

''This isn't legal but I'm obliged to do it for my family,'' said Mehmet Ozgun, a 29-year-old and father of seven.

Kurdish leaders contend that Turkey continues to allow the trade in crude oil and not in diesel fuel because the Kurds earned millions of dollars off the sale and resale of the diesel fuel in the territory they control. The crude oil, by contrast, is shipped directly from Baghdad through an arrangement with the Turkish government that limits what the Kurds can collect.

''The ban on diesel trade is an economic and social embargo of Turkey on Northern Iraq,'' said Bedrettin Karaboga, chairman of the Southeastern Anatolia Industrialists and Businessmen Association. The diesel trade ''is linked to preparations to establish a Kurdish state.''

The Kurdish official said that the cutoff of diesel fuel has cost the Kurdish party a large chunk of its annual $150 million budget.

In the years since the United States has helped to seal off northern Iraq from Mr. Hussein's forces, Kurdish leaders have built a bustling local administration there. The Kurdish Democratic Party, one of the two main Kurdish parties, employs 50,000 people and maintains pensions for another 150,000, a party official said.

Kurdish leaders say they have established a model for the way an Iraq without Mr. Hussein might be governed. Despite the fears of Turkish officials, the Kurdish leaders insist they are not laying the groundwork for a Kurdish state. They say the cutoff in diesel fuel could ultimately hamper efforts to bring stability and democracy to Iraq.

''It is not in the interest of the West for democracy to fail in Iraq,'' the Kurdish leader said.

Meanwhile, near Habur, the truck drivers gather along the highway known as the Silk Road, looking for odd jobs and listening for any news that the gates may open again. One of them was Nusrettin Zorlu, a 32-year-old father of two. Mr. Zorlu said he had not driven his truck into Iraq for more than a year.

Mr. Zorlu was a haggard man, and he wore worried look. After scrounging through the pockets of his worn pin-striped suit, he produced all the money he had left in the world, a handful of Turkish notes worth about 75 cents.

''This is all about politics,'' Mr. Zorlu said, and a crowd of his friends nodded in agreement. ''We just want it to end as soon as possible.''
