THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITARY PREPARATIONS; G.I.'S HONE SKILLS ON IRAQ'S BORDER
By Michael R. Gordon
Nov. 20, 2002


The United States Army has quietly doubled the number of its troops in Kuwait and is practicing offensive operations against Iraq close to the border with Saddam Hussein's forces.

In exercises over the past two days, Army combat engineers trained to blow paths through mine fields. They rehearsed erecting bridges under fire so armored forces can continue their thrusts into enemy territory. Troops conducted infantry assaults against mock strongholds. Army howitzers and Apache helicopters blasted targets at test ranges in terrain virtually identical to the desert American soldiers would confront if President Bush were to order an invasion of Iraq.

''Even though Saddam Hussein has accepted the U.N. resolution, we continue to maintain the mindset that we are going to war,'' said Capt. James Schwartz, the commander of Battery A, a unit of 155-millimeter howitzers from Fort Stewart, Ga.

''In order to keep ourselves mentally ready, that is the mindset that we use,'' he added. ''When I talk to my soldiers, I tell them to take this training seriously because we are about 10 miles from Iraq.''

The Army began training in Kuwait after the Persian Gulf war in 1991, when the United States and its allies evicted Iraqi occupation troops from Kuwait. The exercises were intended to deter Baghdad from attacking Kuwait again, an unlikely prospect. But the mood is tenser now that it is Washington that is considering whether to go on the offensive.

The Army has also quietly expanded its presence here. Over the past year, the Army force in Kuwait has doubled, to about 9,000 troops -- about 3,800 from the brigade now training there and the rest headquarters and logistics staff.

There are two brigades' worth of tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, artillery and other major weapons systems here, twice as much equipment as a year ago.

The precise size of the American military presence in Kuwait is classified, but it totals about 12,000, perhaps somewhat more, including Air Force personnel, a Pentagon spokesman said.

This is just a sliver of what the United States would need to deploy here to go to war against Iraq. But because many Army units have been rotated through Kuwait over the past decade, many officers and soldiers who might be called on to fight would be returning to a familiar arena.

''We have 10 years of experience working in this sort of terrain, this sort of weather conditions and in working with our coalition partners, all of which was fairly new to the Army in 1990,'' said Lt. Gen. David McKiernan, the top Army commander in the region and the officer who would be in charge of all American land forces in the event of a war. ''That has given us much more advantage if we ever had to operate out of here.''

Kuwait these days seems to be divided into two distinct regions: a civilian area near the coast and a vast American training ground in the desert interior.

The Kuwaitis have virtually cordoned off the western part of their country so the Americans can concentrate on their war games. Currently, 750 square miles of Kuwait, about one-fourth of the country, has been set aside for American military exercises, the Army says.

The Americans have put the territory to good use. The Kuwaiti desert now includes an array of semipermanent American military camps, which are surrounded by sand berms and protected by heavy security. The camps are equipped with sophisticated communications for classified messages and television news reports, dining halls that serve hot food and fortified shelters to protect against any attack by Iraqi Scud missiles.

The Army has named the camps after the American states most affected by the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The largest camp, which has a six-mile perimeter, is called New York.

To celebrate Thanksgiving, the mess hall is decked with paper decorations. The soldiers will begin the day with a ''Turkey trot,'' a run around the base. With the soldiers involved in an intensive training regime for a potential combat operation, there are no leaves and few days off.

The troops are currently training here in a regular exercise code-named Desert Spring. They come primarily from the Second Brigade of the Third Infantry Division, which is based at Fort Stewart. The brigade task force, which numbers about 3,800, arrived in September and will reach its peak combat readiness in December, the commanding officers said.

The division is one of several major units that have been formed as part of the Crisis Reserve Force under the United States Central Command, units that the command could rush to the Middle East if the United States was on the verge of war, the Army says.

While the Second Brigade is training in Kuwait, another brigade from the division is practicing desert maneuvers at the National Training Center in California. The last of Third Division's brigades has just completed training in Kuwait, so the division is well versed in desert warfare.

If American ground forces are ordered to enter Iraq, they face many potential obstacles: dried river beds (wadis), oil pipelines and rivers. Iraq also has an ample and diverse collection of mines, including plastic Italian-made mines that are hard to detect. So practicing in such terrain is a high priority.

''We have been here the last 10 years to defend Kuwait, but you win on the offense,'' said General McKiernan. ''Even to defend Kuwait, we do that by winning on the offensive.''

On Monday, some of the brigade's forces practiced an assault. It began when a column of armored vehicles under the command of Capt. Andy Hilmes moved toward its goal.

''We are doing maneuver training,'' explained Col. Dave Perkins, the brigade commander. ''We are doing all the tasks we would have to execute if we were going to war. Our plan was to train on those regardless of the world situation. But the world situation has changed, and so there is a better chance we will have to use them.''

As the column raced toward a trench several feet deep -- simulating a wadi or other obstacle -- Captain Hilmes maneuvered combat engineers to the fore.

The engineers drove to end of the trench in a combat vehicle that unfolded a giant metal bridge. The bridge, which can carry more than 70 tons, was quickly laid across the trench so M-1 tanks and Bradley Fighting Vehicles could race across. To protect the engineers, the column called in a mock artillery strike, including a round with smoke to obscure the battlefield.

But that was just the first step in what was intended to be a carefully synchronized armored advance. Next the column had to navigate a narrow lane, then it zoomed up to a mock minefield. The soldiers simulated firing a line-charge, a cable festooned with 1,600 pounds of explosive.

In actual combat, a rocket would be fired to pull the cable forward and the explosives detonated, thus blasting a path through the minefield. After that, a tank outfitted with a special plow would drive through the newly created path to ''proof'' that lane, that is, set off any mines that were not detonated or push them aside.

After pressing through the mine field in practice, the column soon began to exchange fire with an ''enemy force'' -- four Bradleys and an M-1 tank. Like a giant game of tag, the armored vehicles were outfitted with lasers and target sensors so they could shoot at each other.

Retired military officers, who serve as observers, monitored the war game, armed with laser devices, known as ''God guns,'' that can ''kill'' a tank or Bradley straying into the mock minefield.

After trading fire, the armored column rumbled toward the crest of a hill. Infantry piled out of the Bradleys and charged a stronghold defended by barbed wire and ''enemy'' troops. After the sappers blew a hole in the wire, the infantry troops raced forward, threw themselves against the ground and opened fire.

Observers and soldiers then huddled for a review.

''They moved good and need a little bit more practice,'' said George Conrad, a retired Army sergeant major at the Infantry School at Fort Benning, Ga. ''Once the attack starts, you can't bog down. You got to be able to keep on moving.''

Mr. Conrad said the exercise would be good training for Iraq.

''The terrain is the same,'' he said. ''And they are putting them in to fight here the way they might have to fight in the next couple of months. This is it. And they've done a pretty good job.''
