
THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUNT FOR WEAPONS; Iraq Tour of Suspected Sites Gives Few Clues on Weapons
By John F. Burns
Oct. 13, 2002


If Iraq is developing nuclear weapons, American officials say, its plans almost certainly involve a sun-beaten, dust-blown, ill-kept industrial plant at Al Furat, a bleak site near this town southwest of Baghdad.

Five busloads of reporters and photographers were driven to the site today, and given a 90-minute tour by Iraqi generals, who say it is being used for the repair and development of electronic equipment for Iraq's armed forces.

In his speech about Iraq on Monday, President Bush said satellite photographs had revealed that Iraq was rebuilding at the sites of its past nuclear programs, including this plant, where Saddam Hussein's government had been secretly preparing to enrich uranium on the eve of the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Black-and-white aerial photographs released by the White House to support the speech included two of Al Furat. One was identified as having been taken in 1998, another in September 2002, with arrows pointing to a large building ''originally intended to house a centrifuge enrichment cascade operation.'' An accompanying caption said the building appeared to be in use again.

All week, and every week for months, top officials of Mr. Hussein's government have been saying that the American allegations have been fabricated to justify another war with Iraq. They have offered visits to areas identified by Washington as suspected weapons sites, and today it was the turn of Al Furat, about 20 miles southwest of Baghdad.

The generals who gave the tour today contended that Al Furat had turned the page, and that the site was now used exclusively as a ''research center serving the Iraqi Army in the repair and development of communications equipment.''

The visitors toured laboratories testing outdated Soviet-made radar and radio equipment and tramped across the floors of uncompleted hangar-sized buildings strewn with the twisted wreckage of pipes and girders from previous undertakings.

But whatever Al Furat may be these days, the Iraqis certainly knew that the tour for at least 200 scrambling, sweating reporters would not settle the matter conclusively, and not just because none of the visitors were experts in nuclear physics. The tour left no time to visit all of the dozen or more buildings on the site, and no opportunity to descend into the underground bunkers that appeared to be accessible from steel-sided entranceways with rusting doorways that were dotted about.

The results, mostly, were confusion and befuddlement -- whether that was the intention of the tour's organizers in the Ministry of Military Industrialization, or an inevitability given the complexity of the issue and the chaotic circumstances. What was certain, however, was that tours like these for reporters are unlikely to add very much to the world's knowledge of what Iraq's secretive leadership has been up to.

To gather hard information, international weapons inspectors are required, and even they seem likely to face a perplexing task.

Mr. Bush's hand was strengthened on Friday when the Senate joined the House of Representatives in a resolution giving the president sweeping authority to use force in Iraq.

Iraq's response to the growing pressures from Washington took other forms today, as well. The Iraqis mixed the conciliatory with the confrontational.

In an interview published today in the German weekly Der Spiegel, Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan said Iraq was ready to allow United Nations weapons inspectors to visit eight presidential palaces that Mr. Bush identified in his speech on Monday as possible hiding places for weapons programs. Mr. Ramadan did not say specifically, though, that Iraq was ready to scrap the time-consuming procedures for palace inspections that were agreed to with the United Nations in 1998, and which the United States has said would give the Iraqis the opportunity to move or conceal evidence.

But a letter sent to the United Nations this week backed away from recent agreements on minimum conditions for inspectors to complete their work, and a different tone was struck in an interview with Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, during a visit to Beirut, that was published in Iraqi newspapers today.

Mr. Aziz was quoted as having said, ''America is the one challenging us -- we are not the ones challenging America.''

Iraq also prepared other ripostes for Washington. A gathering of 450 Shiite Muslim clerics in Baghdad issued a religious decree declaring a holy war against the United States and its allies in the event of a military attack. About 55 percent of Iraq's population of 22 million people are Shiite Muslims, though Mr. Hussein and most of the top officials in his government are Sunni Muslims. The Shiites are kept under tight government control here.

The visit by reporters to Al Furat was marked by the ambiguities and frustrations that customarily attend such events in Iraq. On the one hand, there were the flat-out denials by the officers in charge of the plant that its operations have anything to do with nuclear technology; on the other, the realities glimpsed by the visitors -- inconsistencies, as they seemed to some -- that left many with a sense that the generals may have been less than candid.

Lt. Gen. Abbas Saadi, the plant's director general, acknowledged that there had been a ''nuclear program'' at the plant before the gulf war. The concession was necessitated by the findings of United Nations weapons inspectors who raided the plant after that war and found evidence that the Iraqis had built a facility for manufacturing and testing gas centrifuges, a principal means of enriching uranium for nuclear weapons.

One of the buildings at the site, evidently the one marked with an arrow on the photographs released by the White House on Monday, was determined by the weapons inspectors to have been the location for a ''centrifuge cascade'' that would have been used to test the process before a full-scale enrichment plant was put into operation elsewhere.

A problem for any Iraqi official denying the existence of new weapons programs is that all such programs were also insistently denied by Iraq during the early stages of the weapons inspections after 1991, and acknowledged only after United Nations research and Iraqi defectors had led inspectors to the sites.

One indication that the current operations at Al Furat might not be quite as harmless as the Iraq officials claimed came from the extensive defenses around the plant. Sandbagged bunkers lined the approach road after the buses carrying the group turned off the highway leading south from Baghdad. Farther off were clusters of antiaircraft weapons mounted on high earthen berms, all of them manned.

General Saadi, the plant's director, seemed ill at ease when asked about the defenses, but eventually said that it was normal for any country facing military attack to defend its industrial plants.

Asked about Mr. Bush's assertion that ''Iraq is reconstituting its nuclear weapons program,'' the general, an engineer by training, shot back, ''Of course, it's false.'' But when pressed further, he seemed to waver. ''I am sorry,'' he said. ''I have no details about the nuclear program.''

Much of what the reporters saw at the plant had an oddly makeshift appearance, almost as if work on the radar and other electronic appliances under way in the laboratories was new, or at least being conducted in an oddly haphazard way. Secretaries sat staring mutely at the screen savers on their computer desktops, and logged onto programs only when reporters approached. Some testing equipment in otherwise bare laboratories sat on carts parked awkwardly along the walls, as if nobody had given much thought to the matter.

Two large buildings, including a four-story one earmarked in the White House photos, seemed to be under construction, but no work was in progress and little construction machinery was visible.

All in all, the site seemed lacking in the brisk purposefulness usually associated with a military plant. Some of the officers escorting the group made no effort to hide their anger at the intrusion, and at the reporters' skepticism, and stalked off almost as soon as the questions began.

''Bush is a liar,'' said an officer who identified himself only as Colonel Adil. ''You can see for yourself what is here.'' After identifying one battered, rusting torpedo-shaped device lying on a trestle in the corridor as a Soviet-made airborne electronic jamming pod, he stormed off, saying that one of his children had died because United Nations economic sanctions deprived the child of adequate hospital care.

''America is ready to do anything dirty to the Iraqi people, anything!'' he said. ''What Bush wants is Iraq's oil. That is all he wants!''
