A NATION AT WAR: BAGHDAD; A Staggering Blow Strikes at the Heart Of the Iraqi Capital
By John F. Burns
March 22, 2003

The American war on Saddam Hussein exploded tonight in a ferocious display of precision bombing and cruise missile strikes that blasted the heart of the Iraqi ruler's power with a spectacular opening bulls-eye on his most forbidding palace and continued with at least 100 more devastating volleys in the first two hours.

Most of the strikes appeared aimed at the few square miles of the capital that have been the monumental showcase for Mr. Hussein's brutal form of authoritarian rule.

Perhaps 50 strikes came in a 10-minute volley of almost biblical power that followed the opening blast, which hit or came very close to the green ornamental dome atop the Republican Palace where some of the grimmest scenes of Mr. Hussein's rule have played out.

The attacks turned the target area into a cauldron of fireballs and drifting smoke, with one huge building after another erupting in a fury of flame and obliterated granite, marble and steel.


Reporters watching from a high-rise hotel less than a mile away across the Tigris River struggled to find comparisons with the scenes of destruction, even the displays of American air power unleashed in recent years in Afghanistan, Bosnia and Kosovo, and on Baghdad in the Persian Gulf war of 1991.

American planners appeared to have chosen the targets as much for symbolic reasons, to humiliate Mr. Hussein and encourage ordinary Iraqis eager for an end to his repression, as out of any expectation that they could, by themselves, cripple the regime.

Many Iraqis believe that Mr. Hussein, his family and associates, if they survived the first two rounds of airstrikes, have retreated into the vast maze of bunkers and tunnels that underlie the palaces and government buildings, or perhaps fled to secret sanctuaries outside Baghdad.

In their absence, the capital appeared today to be governed as much by fear -- the fear built deep into the psyches of Iraqis over more than two decades -- as by any visible presence of authority.

For days, the only movement at many of the buildings that were struck tonight was by small bands of armed guards, many of them sitting in the open air, on garden chairs and old bedsteads, as they awaited the American attacks, armed with nothing but Kalashnikov rifles.

Judging by the disconsolate waves that some of these men have given passing reporters in recent days, a gesture hitherto unknown among anybody serving in the security apparatus surrounding Mr. Hussein, they may have lived their last days in anticipation of a pitiable end.

Iraqi officials forbade reporters to venture into the target area as long as the attacks continued.

Amid the staccato of the bomb blasts and the metallic whoosh of the cruise missiles as they roared low across the city before striking their targets with a deafening roar, only one ambulance siren could be heard, and then only briefly.

On the deserted roads, no fire engines could be seen. Any survivors in the buildings appeared to have been left to their fates. [The Iraqi government said Saturday that more than 200 civilians were wounded in the attack.]

The attacks continued through the night, but the targets appeared to move away from the central district.

What was impossible to judge today was whether the bombing, and the rapid advance of ground troops driving northward from Kuwait, would fatally weaken Mr. Hussein's grip and push the government toward collapse. The Iraqi leader's boast has been that he survived 38 days of bombing in 1991, and last week it appeared that he relished the chance to take on America again.

Objectively, only hardened loyalists could imagine that Iraq's depleted armed forces would offer much resistance. But Mr. Hussein has built such an apparatus of enforcement that any challenge by Iraqis has seemed improbable. To this has been added the apparent propensity of officials to believe only what the Stalinist system here wants them to believe, and to do only what Mr. Hussein ordains. Ordinary people here whispered as the week progressed that they were ready for the war, and even welcomed it, as long as it was short, and civilian casualties were limited. Today, as the bombers approached, these whispers became more daring. ''What, what, what?'' one man said, pointing surreptitiously toward the sky and winking. His meaning, unambiguously, was that he was tired of waiting for Iraq's new era to begin. But these Iraqis, too, continued to be frozen in fear of government retribution.

Some Iraqis thought before tonight's bombing that matters might be on the verge of a dramatic change because of rumors that some high-ranking officials, perhaps even Mr. Hussein, had been injured or even killed on Thursday. The few who have been prepared to discuss it say, almost uniformly, that the system could not survive without him.

So the rumors -- that Mr. Hussein had been taken from a secret villa Thursday in an ambulance, that his son Qusay had been killed, and that two members of the ruling elite, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz and Foreign Minister Naji Sabri, had been injured or killed -- became wild cards. Efforts to quash the rumors had little effect after state television showed a soundless clip tonight of Mr. Hussein, in a field marshal's uniform, meeting with Qusay and other members of his inner circle. Iraqis said that showing old clips was a well-worn expedient of Iraqi TV, and that the meeting might never have occurred.

One of the abiding memories of the last chapter of Mr. Hussein's rule, should it be ended by American troops, will be of the Interior Minister Muhammad Diab al-Ahmed appearing before reporters in his Baath Party uniform, waving a silver-plated, short-stock Kalashnikov in his hand, finger on the trigger, and carrying in a hunter's vest four magazines of bullets for the rifle and a 10-inch knife in a scabbard. While this made for a scene that might have been scripted by Hollywood for the last days of dying regime, Mr. Ahmed showed no sign that his was a theatrical performance; rather, he seemed to believe every word he said.

''You are asking me why I am here with my Kalashnikov, and my answer is this,'' he said. ''The Iraqi people have sworn that they will not give up their guns to the invaders, and I have a son who is 18, and he is also armed, and we will sacrifice ourselves for President Saddam Hussein and his family. I tell you, it is Bush who is the lone fighter. It is he who has no support. It is we who will achieve a great victory, and we are not dreaming''

The American targets tonight, in addition to the Republican Palace, included the huge neo-imperial headquarters of the ruling Baath Party, the even bigger Council of Ministers building with its colonnaded facade that dwarfs all but the largest government buildings in Washington, and at least a dozen other structures in a presidential compound that stretches about two miles up the river from the Republican Palace.

As symbolic as any other, the targets also included Al Sajida Palace, the newest of about 20 reserved for Mr. Hussein and his family, and named for Mr. Hussein's first wife, Sajida, mother of his sons Qusay and Uday.

Just as the Republican Palace was the prime target in the first series of bombing strikes, the Sajida appeared to be the principal objective of a second wave, mainly by cruise missiles, that began about 90 minutes after the first.

The Sajida was another huge domed building with four 30-foot bronze busts of Mr. Hussein dressed as the ancient Mesopotamian warrior Saladin on the square corners beneath the dome.

Like the Republican Palace, the Sajida erupted in a ball of fire and thick black smoke, and then seemed to disappear from the horizon. The extent of the damage was impossible to determine.

Many here were primed for today's attacks after hearing shortwave radio broadcasts predicting the shift in American strategy.

At 9 p.m. precisely, with the city's streets almost deserted and an ominous silence reaching to the horizon, the attack began. In an instant, the Republican Palace was a sea of fire and rising pillars of smoke lit with a spangling of brightly burning debris.

Viewed from across the river, successive strikes turned the hundreds of acres of palace grounds and their carefully manicured palm trees into a stadium of light, as though war had finally begun to reveal some of the secrets of one of the most forbidden places in Iraq.
