THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; U.N. SPLIT WIDENS AS ALLIES DISMISS DEADLINE ON IRAQ
By Felicity Barringer
March 8, 2003

With an American-led war on Iraq appearing ever more likely, the United States and Britain said today that they would urge the Security Council to vote next week on a new resolution that would give Iraq until March 17 to disarm. But France, Russia and China, which hold veto power, swiftly dismissed the new proposal.

The new move to unite the world's deeply divided powers came after the chief United Nations weapons inspectors bluntly if quietly contradicted some American and British assertions about Iraqi violations and drew sharp rebuttals from Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and the British foreign minister, Jack Straw.

Mohamed ElBaradei, chief of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said that a report -- which had earlier been identified as coming from British intelligence -- that Iraq had tried to purchase uranium from Niger was based on fake documents.

Both Dr. ElBaradei and Hans Blix said that under the threat of force, Iraqi cooperation was increasing, though belatedly. Mr. Blix noted, ''One can hardly avoid the impression that after a period of somewhat reluctant cooperation, there has been an acceleration of initiatives from the Iraqi side since the end of January.'' To complete inspections properly ''even with a proactive Iraqi attitude,'' he said, ''would not take years, nor weeks, but months.''

With foreign ministers and the weapons inspectors converging in emotional debate on Iraq for the third time in the past month, none of the six undecided countries on the 15-nation Security Council tipped their hand as to how they might vote. They pleaded instead for the five powers that dominate the body to find some way to find common ground. [Excerpts, Pages A8-9.]

Ambassador John D. Negroponte of the United States said last night that a vote could come ''as early as Tuesday.'' Even if the resolution fails to pass, he said, the United States believes it has ample legal authority to go to war under the previous resolutions.

The United States and Britain remained unsure of collecting the nine votes they need for passage even of the amended resolution, said another Council diplomat who supports it. This evening, one dejected diplomat left the meeting shaking his head and saying, ''we are headed for a disaster,'' although he added he could not be sure which way the vote would go.

The French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, scornfully rejected the new resolution. ''By imposing a deadline of only a few days, would we merely be seeking a pretext for war?'' he asked. ''As a permanent member of the Security Council, I will say it again: France will not allow a resolution to pass that authorizes the automatic use of force.'' The Russian and Chinese foreign ministers followed suit.

The assessment from the weapons inspectors took account of Iraq's cooperation since Nov. 27, when inspections in Iraq resumed for the first time since 1998, after the Security Council passed a unanimous resolution. In addition to casting severe doubt on the reported Iraqi attempt to buy uranium in Niger, Dr. ElBaradei said that ''there is no indication that Iraq has attempted to import aluminum tubes for use in centrifuge enrichment'' of uranium into weapons-grade material. For months, American officials have cited Iraq's importation of these tubes as evidence that Mr. Hussein's scientists have been seeking to develop a nuclear capability.

Mr. Blix reiterated that the destruction of 34 Al Samoud 2 missiles in the past week ''constitutes a substantial measure of disarmament indeed, the first since the middle of the 1990's. We are not watching the breaking of toothpicks.''

In response, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell made a pointed reference to Dr. ElBaradei's agency, the International Atomic Energy Agency, saying, ''as we all know, in 1991 the I.A.E.A. was just days away from determining that Iraq did not have a nuclear program. We soon found out otherwise.''

Turning to Mr. Blix's assessment of Iraq's recent moves, Mr. Powell said, ''I don't know if we should call these things 'initiatives.' Whatever they are, Iraq's small steps are certainly not initiatives.'' He added, ''I know these are not toothpicks, but real missiles, but the problem is, we don't know how many missiles there are, how many toothpicks there are.''

While the charged exchanges took place in and around the Council chamber, and were beamed to television sets around the world, a United Nations official elsewhere in the New York headquarters building reported that large sections of the fence on the Kuwait-Iraq border were being cut away.

Local workmen under contract to the Kuwaiti government told United Nations officials that they had been instructed to finish cutting 35 entryways by March 15.

Earlier, United Nations officials in Kuwait encountered armed men in civilian clothes in the same area who identified themselves as United States marines and said they were testing communications gear.

At the Council today, both Mr. Powell and Mr. Straw refused to be put on the defensive, as they were during the last public face-off of foreign ministers on Feb. 14. Mr. Straw, in particular, made a frontal assault on his French colleague, saying: ''Dominique also said the choice before us was disarmament by peace or disarmament by war. Dominique, that is a false choice.''

He also said that the only route to disarmament is ''by backing our diplomacy with the credible threat of force.'' When Mr. Straw finished, he was greeted with applause, a turnaround from the last meeting of ministers in the Council chamber, when it was Mr. de Villepin's oration against war that drew applause.

Mr. Straw's amendment was described by one admiring Council diplomat as having ''intricate wording'' that tries to turn the current war-versus-peace debate into a debate over Iraq's failure to comply with Council demands, most recently in its resolution 1441, which passed unanimously in November.

The original resolution was submitted by the United States, Britain and Spain on Feb. 24. President Bush said on Thursday night that the United States would call for a vote even if it was not clear that the measure could garner enough votes. This weekend, Mr. de Villepin is flying to the capitals of Angola and Cameroon, two uncommitted Council members.

Late today, as the council continued its meeting behind closed doors, Amr Moussa, secretary general of the Arab League, told reporters here that a delegation of Arab League members would travel to Baghdad soon to talk with Mr. Hussein about the worsening crisis.

Late yesterday, a new draft proposal began to circulate that called for Iraq to ''fulfill the key outstanding disarmament tasks'' that weapons inspectors would set for it. It also provided for extended inspections as the tool for disarmament once Iraq complies with the initial request.

Most tellingly, it declares ''a full amnesty'' for government officials who cooperate with the United Nations, and calls for protection and security for them and their families.

In rejecting the new British and American proposal that would give Iraq, in essence, the next 10 days to disarm, the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, said: ''We need no new Security Council resolutions. We have enough of those. We need now active support of the inspectors in carrying out their tasks.''

Asked about the British ultimatum, the Iraqi envoy, Mohammed Aldouri, said scornfully, ''So they will give us only 10 days to give up all we have?'' He added: ''Really, this is nonsense. We are doing our utmost. We can't do more.''

THE AMENDMENT

Changes to Draft Resolution on Iraq

Yesterday, the United States, Britain and Spain amended a previous draft resolution to the Security Council that had decided that Iraq had ''failed to take the final opportunity afforded it in Resolution 1441.'' The new amendment changes that language as follows.

The Security Council, . . .

ACTING -- under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,

1. REAFFIRMS the need for full implementation of Resolution 1441;

2. CALLS ON Iraq immediately to take the decisions necessary in the interests of its people and the region;

3. DECIDES that Iraq will have failed to take the final opportunity afforded by Resolution 1441 unless, on or before March 17, 2003, the Council concludes that Iraq has demonstrated full, unconditional, immediate and active cooperation in accordance with its disarmament obligations under Resolution 1441 and previous relevant resolutions, and is yielding possession to Unmovic and the I.A.E.A. of all weapons, weapon delivery and support systems and structures, prohibited by Resolution 687 (1991) and all subsequent relevant resolutions, and all information regarding prior destruction of such items.
