
THREATS AND RESPONSES: WHITE HOUSE; U.S. IS PESSIMISTIC TURKS WILL ACCEPT AID DEAL ON IRAQ
By David E. Sanger With Dexter Filkins
Feb. 20, 2003

White House officials sounded pessimistic today that their offer of $26 billion in aid to Turkey would be enough to win the country's approval for the United States to open a northern front against Iraq if war comes.

Their growing frustration with Turkey came as President Bush was dealing with a variety of recalcitrant allies at the United Nations and in capitals around the world, allies that are urging considerably more time for weapons inspections or a strategy of containment for Iraq. Even Italy, a stalwart ally, today urged that Mr. Bush not take military action unless he had explicit approval from the Security Council. It is far from clear that Mr. Bush can win that approval, and today he spent half an hour on the telephone with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain developing a strategy for introducing a brief resolution that might, in some form, set a deadline for Iraqi compliance.

But the immediate concern was Turkey, and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld was talking publicly about how the Pentagon was already considering alternative deployments.

The leader of Turkey's governing party, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, said tonight that the offer the White House described as ''final'' was not yet good enough, and that Parliament would not vote this week on whether to allow the deployment of upwards of 40,000 American troops along the Iraqi border.

Mr. Bush made no public comment about the standoff today when he met Lord Robertson, the NATO secretary general, in the Oval Office. But both men offered pointed reminders that surveillance planes and chemical and biological protective gear were already arriving in Turkey in response to the country's call for help to prevent a retaliatory attack from Iraq in any conflict.

In private, though, administration officials were fuming, with one senior official calling the Turkish efforts to hold out for more aid -- and perhaps access to oil from the Kirkuk region of Iraq -- as ''extortion in the name of alliance.'' Another said that despite a stream of aid from the United States, ''the Turks seem to think that we'll keep the bazaar open all night.''

''There comes a moment when plans must be made, decisions must be made,'' the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said today, adding that negotiation ''cannot stretch on indefinitely.''

But Turkish leaders say that their country, where popular opinion is strongly opposed to a war, sustained huge economic losses in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war in 1991 and that they are are determined to make sure that such things do not happen again.

Lord Robertson's visit here was intended to show that Mr. Bush intends to continue working closely with NATO, despite the fractious battle that took place within the alliance over the last week about whether to send military aid to Turkey. France and Germany tried to block the defensive aid, arguing that to help Turkey was to pave the way to war.

In a double-edged reference to NATO's problems and Mr. Bush's own, Lord Robertson gestured to a statue of Churchill that Mr. Bush keeps within sight of his desk and noted that the World War II leader of Britain ''once famously said of the United States of America, the United States can always be counted on to do the right thing, after it's exhausted every other alternative.''

As Mr. Bush laughed, Lord Robertson added: ''Well, you can say exactly the same thing about NATO, but when we get there, we're strong, and we stand for the values that unite a great alliance.'' They took no questions from reporters.

But unity did not seem the message of the day. Italy's prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, distanced himself from Mr. Bush's declaration that he had all the authority he needed to order military action against Iraq for defying United Nations mandates. Mr. Berlusconi, one of Mr. Bush's closest allies, said he believed that more explicit United Nations backing was needed, though he criticized France and Germany for their opposition.

The administration has made no secret of its growing anger at President Jacques Chirac of France, who told Central and Eastern European nations on Tuesday that if they continued to ally themselves with Mr. Bush on Iraq, they would jeopardize their chances of joining the European Union.

Today Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said the French and others opposing confrontation with Saddam Hussein were ''afraid of stepping up to the responsibility of imposing the will of the international community.''

Asked today whether he meant to suggest that the French were afraid of war, Mr. Powell replied, ''I didn't.'' He said all of the Security Council members that signed the Iraq disarmament resolution in November ''must not be afraid of what might be required in the future to implement such a resolution.''

Ewen Buchanan, a spokesman for the United Nations inspectors under Hans Blix, said tonight that no Iraqi scientists whom the inspectors had sought to interview on issues related to potential chemical or biological weapons or missile technology had consented to be interviewed alone since Mr. Blix last visited Iraq on Feb. 8. Although more than 30 such private interviews have been requested, only 3 have been conducted to date.

Mr. Fleischer and other administration officials said another resolution would be introduced at the Security Council soon, and the British ambassador to the United Nations, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, told reporters that ''explicitly or implicitly'' he expected that it would contain a deadline for Iraqi compliance. The time line under discussion now, officials of several nations said, would point to a vote after March 1, and it seems unlikely that Mr. Bush would order military action before the Security Council vote is resolved.

One reason the introduction of the resolution has been delayed, officials say, is the continuing uncertainty over Turkey. Much of the negotiation concerns grants and the forgiveness of debt for an economy that, in the estimation of the International Monetary Fund and others, has been run without discipline for years.

The Turks, who are demanding as much as $32 billion in aid, ''see a moment this month to get the kind of deal that other countries in similar financial straits could only dream of,'' a senior administration economic official said the other day.

Still, an administration official said other issues were in contention in negotiating with the Turks -- namely, the future of the Turkish military presence in northern Iraq and the Turkish desire for some oil concession at Kirkuk in Iraq.

''The Turks want to control the operation at Kirkuk, at a minimum through a pipeline,'' the official said. ''That's in a way a better deal for them than American aid.''

But Mr. Bush and his aides have often said Iraq's oil is for the benefit of the Iraqi people, and they realize that any discussion of guaranteeing access to the oil to Turkey -- or any other nation -- would make it appear that the war is about oil rights, not weapons of mass destruction.

The official said giving Turkey guarantees was impossible ''without breaking an awful lot of crockery,'' including ''looking disingenuous to our Kurdish friends'' in northern Iraq.

If talks with Turkey fail to turn around, the Pentagon would have to divert ships full of troops and equipment that are approaching Turkey's coast. American officials said they would send those ships to the Persian Gulf if they did not have a Turkish decision Turks by the end of week.

Mr. Rumsfeld -- acutely aware that the first rule of negotiating is not to appear too eager a buyer -- told reporters this afternoon, ''Obviously the more assistance one gets, the easier it is; the less assistance one gets, the more difficult it is.'' But with Turkey's aid or without it, he said, an attack on Iraq is ''doable.''

As negotiations with the Americans appeared to go nowhere, Turkish officials spoke with bitterness over what they said was the American refusal to offer more economic aid. A senior Turkish official said tonight that he had grown pessimistic that a deal could be reached.

''Things are not going well,'' the Turkish official said. ''Nothing has happened in the past few hours to change my mind.''

The deadlock was apparently unbroken by a string of high-level meetings and conversations today. Mr. Powell called the Turkish prime minister, Abdullah Gul, and Robert Pearson, the American ambassador to Turkey, visited officials at the Turkish Foreign Ministry. Vice President Dick Cheney made similar phone calls several days ago.
