A NATION AT WAR: BAGHDAD; Officials in Iraq Voice Defiance After Airstrikes
By John F. Burns
March 23, 2003

Senior Iraqi officials struck a posture of defiance today in the face of advancing coalition troops and a night of punishing air attacks on Baghdad that reduced many of Saddam Hussein's most prized palaces and other crucial government buildings to hollowed-out, smoldering wrecks.

By any measure, the attacks today appeared to find Mr. Hussein and his ruling elite in Baghdad in the tightest spot since the Iraqi leader took power in 1979. But far from acknowledging that Mr. Hussein's days as an absolute ruler might be numbered, the government went into a mode of insistent denial.

After daybreak, officials took only three hours to assess a night of American bombing and cruise missile attacks that were the heaviest inflicted on Iraq in any raid since the countries went to war over Iraq's occupation of Kuwait in 1990. Reporters saw the ruins of at least 15 of the most important government buildings, including two of Mr. Hussein's grandest palaces, his presidential office, the main government headquarters, a telecommunications center and several key intelligence and security headquarters.

In effect, the American attacks punched a huge hole in Mr. Hussein's prestige and the aura of personal invincibility he has cultivated relentlessly through years of harsh rule.

Many buildings symbolic of his power, including the Republican Palace that serves as the Iraqi equivalent of the White House, and a huge new palace named for his wife, Sajida, that has been the acme of his personal taste and a blunt expression of his personality cult, appeared from a drive around Baghdad to have been so severely damaged as to be uninhabitable, and possibly even unrepairable.

But Iraqi officials chose to pretend that the assault had been far less severe, at least in terms of its impact on Mr. Hussein personally. The information minister, Muhammad Said al-Sahhaf, said at a news conference that the attacks had hit ''several civilian places, and many buildings and houses were destroyed.''

He implied that the main government building hit in the raids was a guest house set aside by Mr. Hussein for the use of prominent foreign guests, including Nelson Mandela and the former Algerian leader, Ahmed Ben Bella. ''This palace has been destroyed,'' he said.

One question that remained from the raids Friday night was the identity of a giant slab-sided building in a sprawling presidential compound adjacent to the Republican Palace that the Pentagon appeared to have selected for special punishment, with at least three bombing strikes and four cruise missiles.

Iraqis said today that the building was the presidential office, and that it was modeled on an ancient structure found in Ur, in southern Iraq, that archaeologists have identified as the site of one of the earliest civilizations. It appeared to be a burned-out wreck, like many of the targeted buildings.

The attacks on Friday night, the third in a series that began in the predawn darkness of Thursday, underscored how defenseless Iraq is against satellite- and laser-guided weapons.

Although a senior Iraqi official told reporters today that two American pilots had been captured, that appeared not to be true, at least according to the Pentagon.

The Iraqi claim was part of a wider pattern of statements that conflicted starkly with American and British accounts of how the war was going. Iraq also contended today that coalition ground forces had scored none of the breakthroughs claimed at the port of Umm Qasr, on the Fao peninsula, or in the drive north from Kuwait to the city of Nasiriya, and that the forces were, in fact, being driven back with heavy losses inflicted by the Iraqis. The military also claimed to have shot down 21 cruise missiles.

In the nine hours of air attacks that began Friday night and ended at dawn on Saturday, there were more than 100 separate strikes.

Iraqi defenses appeared to be capable of doing little beyond picking up the incoming American aircraft on radar, setting off air-raid sirens, then firing antiaircraft weapons more or less blindly into the night sky.

As dusk approached today, an air of desperation crept in with the lighting of huge trenches of heavy oil at places around the perimeter of the city, with the aim of casting a heavy pall of smoke into the air to obscure targets from American pilots.

The oil plumes were a tactic used unsuccessfully during the 38 days of allied air attacks in the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Iraqis walked into the streets today in a bemused mood to see the early spring skies darkening with the thick, acrid smoke. As a matter of morale or effective defense, the move appeared to have all the cogency of the paper tigers that Chinese generals used to hang on city walls to frighten attacking forces.

In practice, the Iraqi capital appeared to be an open target range for American attacks, with the Pentagon free to pick off any building it wanted, at any time.

In political terms, Iraqi officials appeared to be in a bind, describing the air attacks as ''the barbaric bombardment of Baghdad.'' On Friday, officials took reporters to El Yarmouk Hospital with wards filled with many of the 215 Iraqi civilians said to have suffered injuries in the attacks. Three civilians were said to have been killed. Many of those injured were women and children. Some victims appeared to have suffered severe burn and blast injuries, while a majority had more minor wounds, mostly from shards of glass and shrapnel.

Against this, the officials seemed reluctant to acknowledge the full extent of military casualties from the attacks, or the physical damage, perhaps out of a concern to say nothing that could set off a downward spiral in the prestige -- and ultimately the power -- of Mr. Hussein.

One relief for the Pentagon was that there appeared to have been no major errors in the strikes.

The reporters were taken to a site beside the Tigris in southern Baghdad where a bomb or missile had obliterated what was described as a ''tourist restaurant,'' apparently empty at the time of the attack.

The debris suggested there had been a large, industrial-size kitchen there, but the giant concrete beams in the wreckage indicated that the building might also have had other uses, perhaps as a fortified refuge. Several major palaces and government buildings lie only a mile or two from the site.

On the crucial issue of Mr. Hussein's standing with Iraqis, the country found itself facing a challenge to its leadership with no obvious precedent since the assassination of King Faisal II in 1958.

In addition, Mr. Hussein, who is 65, has made no public pronouncement since a brief, faltering television statement three hours after the war started with predawn air attacks on Thursday. That appearance hardly bolstered public morale, at least among those Iraqis who look to Mr. Hussein to provide a strong hand as an enfeebled Iraq heads deeper into a conflict with the world's greatest military power.

In his remarks on Thursday, Mr. Hussein appeared shaken and aged, perhaps by an American air raid that Washington officials said had hit a house in southern Baghdad where Mr. Hussein had been meeting other top political and military officials. If both elements claimed by American officials were true -- that Mr. Hussein was at the meeting and had somehow survived a direct air attack -- it would not have been the first time he had been the target of an assassination attempt, though the numerous previous attempts have mainly been by Iraqis and not by foreign powers.

But what has added to the mystery since Thursday is that Mr. Hussein, normally inclined to issue long, grandiose statements at times of crisis, has simply disappeared.

All he has left to Iraq's 24 million people at a time of crisis is the five-minute, disjointed, hand-lettered denunciation on Thursday of the ''criminal little Bush,'' and his vow to Iraqis that ''these days will add to your glorious history.''

Today, attempts by reporters to gain some elucidation met with a blank wall. At a news conference, an American reporter asked when Mr. Hussein would be making another address on the war to the Iraqi people.

''Next!'' the information minister, Muhammad Said al-Sahhaf, said sharply, beckoning to another reporter for a new question.

Moments later, a different reporter tried again. Had the minister seen Mr. Hussein in person at any time in the last few days?

''Next! Next!'' Mr. Sahhaf replied, still more testily, then demanded: ''Please ask something reasonable.''
