THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT; BUSH IS DOUBTFUL IRAQ WILL COMPLY WITH U.N. DEMANDS
By David E. Sanger
Sept. 14, 2002


President Bush said yesterday that it was ''highly doubtful'' that Saddam Hussein would meet United Nations demands to disarm, and American officials said they would seek wording in any new Security Council resolution authorizing any member nation to use force if Iraq did not comply.

Laying the groundwork for a possible military operation soon, Mr. Bush said the United States would insist on short deadlines. ''We're talking days and weeks, not months and years,'' he said.

Iraq remained defiant. Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz rejected the unconditional return of arms inspectors that Mr. Bush demanded, saying, ''We have had a bad experience with them.''

As the president returned to Washington after a two-day stay in New York, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell kept up diplomatic pressure against Iraq at the United Nations, apparently with some success.

Russia, after intensive consultations with American officials, issued an explicit warning to Iraq, saying Baghdad would face ''consequences'' for failing to cooperate with Security Council resolutions, but did not define what those consequences would be. [Page A6.]

Among the five permanent Council members, only China has yet to issue a clear warning. It insisted yesterday on a diplomatic solution.

The European Union urged quick action by the Security Council, and Egypt and Jordan, which in the past have warned of the dangers of a confrontation with Iraq, put the onus on Mr. Hussein to allow inspectors full access to his country.

Mr. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney used progress at the United Nations to press Congressional Democrats for support. The president said that ''if I were running for office, I'm not sure how I'd explain to the American people'' why Congress was failing to act while waiting for the United Nations to act. (At the same time, Mr. Bush is hoping to use a Congressional resolution to bolster his case at the United Nations.)

Mr. Bush seemed to be operating with a timetable that would give the Security Council a few weeks to adopt a resolution, United Nations inspectors a month or two more to get organized on the ground in Iraq. If they are obstructed, military action, probably bombing, could begin as soon as December. Although he did not mention specific dates, Mr. Bush said Secretary Powell ''understands there will be deadlines with the resolution.''

In Washington, a potential Democratic presidential candidate, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, came out strongly on Thursday for Mr. Hussein to be deposed. Yesterday, however, the Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, while clearly still wrestling with the questions about the implications of American military action, said he wanted to work with Mr. Bush. He added that just because Democrats were raising questions did not mean that they would oppose Mr. Bush's effort.

At the same time, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Richard B. Myers, also made it clear today that the United States Central Command, responsible for American forces in the Middle East, would probably establish a forward headquarters in the Persian Gulf state of Qatar soon.

While maintaining that the movement of 600 officers there in November was simply an exercise, he indicated that they would probably stay. According to most officials, the Pentagon's preferred time for military action is in January or February, when the weather is cool enough for soldiers to wear protective gear to ward off chemical or biological agents.

''It just makes sense to have your headquarters in your area of responsibility,'' General Myers, the military's senior officer, said during a luncheon speech in Washington. ''I think that's a likely outcome.''

The president's declaration that he fully expected Mr. Hussein to resist the United Nations mandates was the closest he has come to a public acknowledgment that he is going through the paces at the United Nations chiefly to build diplomatic support and avoid accusations that his administration is unilateralist and scorns its allies.

When one of his chief advisers was asked by reporters on Thursday whether the administration really thought there was any chance Mr. Hussein would satisfy the United Nations' demands, the official said, ''No.''

Mr. Bush went further yesterday, suggesting that action was necessary because Mr. Hussein might strike out soon, rather than wait for the United Nations to gather support against him.

''I don't imagine Saddam Hussein sitting around, saying, 'Gosh, I think I'm going to wait for some resolution,' '' Mr. Bush said. ''He's a threat that we must deal with as quickly as possible.''

He added: ''This man has had 11 years to comply. For 11 long years, he's ignored world opinion. And he's put the credibility of the United Nations on line.''

In the administration's view, new resolutions at the United Nations should include language authorizing any member nations -- including, of course, the United States, with or without its allies -- to enforce disarmament if Iraq does not quickly comply. That would leave open the option for a coordinated military campaign among allies, or a unilateral American strike.

Mr. Daschle, at a lunch with New York Times editors and reporters, said a number of questions were still ''worth asking'' before such a strike made sense.

''What would military action do to the broader war on terrorism?'' he asked. ''What kind of 'governmental organizational presence' would be needed in Iraq once Saddam Hussein is deposed? Would a U.S. incursion into a country that had not struck it first create a precedent for India to strike Pakistan?''

He said these were the kinds of questions Democrats had a responsibility to ask. But he also said he wanted to work with Mr. Bush and avoid a partisan vote.

''I think it would be unfortunate if people drew from that a premature conclusion that we were opposed to what the president's doing.''

The Pentagon appears to be expecting that a month or two of diplomacy will give way to military action.

The ''exercise'' in Qatar is to test the command's ability to send in a headquarters rapidly in a crisis and to carry out a war game.

But other Pentagon officials said it was likely that the staff members would remain in the Persian Gulf after the exercise was complete, and allow Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the head of Central Command, to have a battle staff on the ground ready for any campaign to oust Mr. Hussein.

The timing of setting up the new headquarters is important. Mr. Bush and his top aides are still reviewing military options for attacking Iraq that General Franks has drafted. But most military commanders say it would take at least 90 days -- or roughly until mid-December if initial orders went out today -- to amass 80,000 to 100,000 troops in the Persian Gulf region, and even longer to assemble a larger force.

By early December, the Navy will have three aircraft carriers within striking distance of Iraq. Some 4,000 marines aboard ships would also be in the region.

While many of those forces are now scheduled to leave the area in early December, as part of normal troop rotations, their deployments could be extended if war appears imminent, military officials said.

Religious considerations could also affect the administration's timetable for war. The monthlong Muslim holy period of Ramadan begins on Nov. 5 or 6, depending on where it is being observed, and the United States would probably want to delay military action until at least December in deference to its Muslim allies.

The Central Command headquarters is situated in Tampa, Fla., because Arab nations have always been wary of allowing a major American command to operate from their soil. But it is necessary to establish a forward command center to oversee a major military operation.

During the Persian Gulf war in 1991, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf established a forward headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. But this time around, the Saudis have expressed reluctance to permit the United States to run another war against Iraq from its territory.

So last year, military commanders began seriously looking at a large base in Qatar called Al Udeid as a backup command post to the sophisticated American air operations center at Prince Sultan Air Base outside of Riyadh.

General Myers sidestepped questions of what restrictions Saudi Arabia might place on American military operations. During the war in Afghanistan, for instance, the Saudis prohibited American planes from flying missions from Saudi bases.

''I would anticipate in any future operations we'd have cooperation from friends and allies, and that includes Saudi Arabia,'' General Myers said.
