THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD'S VIEW; Citing North Korea, an Iraqi Aide Says 'Oil and Israel,' Not Weapons, Spur the U.S.
By John F. Burns
Oct. 22, 2002


One of President Saddam Hussein's top advisers said today that the Bush administration's failure to threaten tough action against North Korea since its acknowledgment of a nuclear weapons program showed that the real American objective in threatening Iraq was ''oil and Israel,'' not the administration's professed concern about secret weapons programs.

The official, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, part of Mr. Hussein's powerful inner circle, has been Iraq's principal spokesman to the world for more than a decade.

He said in an interview that Washington had shown its hand last week after a senior American official visiting North Korea was told that the Pyongyang government had a nuclear weapons program, in breach of agreements signed in the 1990's.

''They are not worried that Washington, D.C., could be bombed in 24 hours,'' Mr. Aziz said in the interview, which was conducted in English at his office here. ''They are taking it in a very cool manner.

''North Korea has admitted to having a secret nuclear program. The United States is not asking that North Korea be inspected in the way they are asking for Iraq to be inspected. Why? Because there are two things absent in North Korea: oil and Israel. The reason for this warmongering policy toward Iraq is oil and Israel.''

Mr. Aziz reiterated denials that his government had secret programs to develop biological, chemical and nuclear weapons, and said it was ready to cooperate fully with United Nations weapons inspectors if agreements were reached for resuming the inspections halted in 1998.

He declined to say whether the government would accept or reject a tough new inspection mandate that the United States and Britain are seeking in the Security Council, noting that no draft of the resolution had been presented to Baghdad.

But in a series of remarks that seemed to foreshadow tough bargaining over the inspections, Mr. Aziz said Iraq could not allow its scientists to be taken out of Iraq for questioning.

In negotiations over the new United Nations mandate, American officials have demanded that the inspection teams be allowed to take Iraqi weapons experts and their entire families outside Iraq for questioning, to avoid the intimidation that appeared to have stifled testimony from Iraqi experts during inspection efforts from 1991 to 1998.

''How are they going to take scientists out of the country against their will?'' Mr. Aziz asked. ''What leader in the world is going to allow the Americans to take these scientists out of the country against their will? They are living the law of the jungle.''

He said that in demanding stringent new terms for the inspections, the United States was not interested in discovering hidden weapons programs, as it claimed, but in seeking a pretext for a new war with Iraq that would allow President Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain to pursue their declared aim of ''regime change.''

''The inspectors will find that all the talk of Iraq stockpiling weapons of mass destruction is simply a lie, and put by Bush and Blair as a pretext for staging a war,'' Mr. Aziz said.

During the 90-minute interview, he appeared tired and somewhat dispirited compared with the feisty, defiant figure he has cut in the past. He met with two American reporters in the vast but largely empty new Council of Ministers building in central Baghdad, a pillared structure of almost Babylonian proportions that has been rebuilt with little constraint on costs since American bombs and missiles largely destroyed it during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The interview came barely 24 hours after one of the most astonishing events in the turbulent history of Iraq, the emptying of the country's prisons under a sweeping amnesty declared by President Hussein. The decree freed tens of thousands of inmates on Sunday, including large numbers of men and women awaiting execution for alleged political crimes, as well as murderers and petty thieves.

In private today, even government officials were comparing the tumultuous scenes when a vast mob of relatives and other Iraqis stormed into Abu Ghraib prison to the storming of the Bastille.

The mob burst through the gates of the prison, a grim fortress outside Baghdad, and into vast cellblocks, liberating thousands of prisoners, including many not covered by the amnesty. Most of the guards stood by or joined in battering holes through cellblock walls.

The way the amnesty barreled out of control, with prisoners, relatives and even many guards defying all attempts to restore order, seemed certain to have shaken to the core a government that has turned Iraq into one of the world's most rigidly controlled police states.

But Mr. Aziz scoffed at the suggestion that Mr. Hussein had unleashed forces he had not anticipated, and dismissed, too, any notion that the prisoner release had been ordered in a bid to deprive Mr. Bush of one of his arguments for toppling Mr. Hussein -- that he is a murdering dictator.

''We are not afraid of the prisoners,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''If we were afraid of the prisoners, we could surround Abu Ghraib with tanks and massacre everybody who raises his fist against us.'' He added: ''A president who is threatened like Saddam Hussein does not release these tens of thousands of people if he is not confident that they will support the leadership, and that if there is a war they will support the leadership too.''

Mr. Aziz, 66, said the amnesty had been ordered for the reason given by Mr. Hussein on Sunday: that he wanted to thank Iraqis for his re-election. Mr. Hussein claimed 100 per cent support in a one-candidate referendum last week.

''When the family of somebody who has been in prison for 25 years, or is facing execution, goes to the polls for the leadership, we have to reciprocate their loyalty,'' Mr. Aziz said.

Mr. Aziz, a Chaldean Christian, compared Mr. Hussein's decision to the forgiveness shown by Jesus toward the Roman centurions who crucified him.

''That's our way of dealing with the people,'' he said. ''If you are a good Muslim or a good Christian, you will pardon. Aren't you a believer? Jesus Christ pardoned those who crucified, then executed, him.''

Famed for his acerbic tongue, Mr. Aziz seemed more his old self when discussing Mr. Bush and other leading American officials associated with the administration's most hawkish wing on Iraq.

He said Mr. Bush and his top aides were stupid for thinking American troops could launch a ground invasion of Iraq and not be overwhelmed by Iraqi resistance.

Referring to the first President Bush's decision not to invade Iraq after driving Iraqi troops from Kuwait in 1991, he said: ''Bush the father is wiser than Bush the son in dealing with this situation. Bush the father made the right decision for Iraq, and for America. He hated us, but he knew that it would be a costly campaign, and therefore he stopped.''

Mr. Aziz also mocked top American officials for their insistence on a United Nations inspection mandate that would give immediate, unhindered access to eight of Mr. Hussein's palaces, saying inspections in 1998 had covered ''each and every corner'' of the palaces and found no trace of any forbidden weapons or weapons materials.

He said Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and others were spreading ''a big lie'' in suggesting that Iraq was moving weapons materials from site to site to evade detection. United Nations and American electronic surveillance techniques can spot any such activity without the need for inspectors, Mr. Aziz said.

He also condemned the Americans for thinking that they could win a ground war in Iraq.

''Let them do it, if they can,'' he said. ''Invade Iraq, because at that time the Iraqi Army, the Iraqi leadership and the Iraqi people will fight to the last bullet, and it will be very costly. We are a proud nation, and we are not going to bow down in front of the new tyrants of the world.''

As for suggestions by President Bush and other American officials that American troops would be cheered by crowds if they entered Baghdad, Mr. Aziz gave a mocking laugh.

''Isn't this arrogance?'' he said. ''Are they being cheered in Afghanistan? They are deceiving themselves and the whole American nation. America is taking over the world, you see, and an American soldier is not going to be cheered when he enters our country -- he is going to be killed.''
