A NATION AT WAR: THE ATTACK; ALLIES OUTSIDE BIGGEST SOUTHERN CITY; FIREFIGHTS ON THE ROUTE TO BAGHDAD
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 23, 2003

As air forces struck Baghdad at dawn Saturday and again overnight with fusillades of cruise missiles, American and British ground forces reached the outskirts of Basra, Iraq's largest southern city, and sought to enter it not with a fight but by promising aid.

Allied armies met resistance as they swept past population centers and continued to close on the Iraqi capital, Baghdad. Saturday, the Third Infantry Division had pushed half way toward that objective by reaching Samawa, where heavy fighting and mortar exchanges were under way. [Map, Page B16.]

Earlier, the division's Third Brigade captured the bridge across the Euphrates River at Nasiriya after seizing the Tallil air base, opening a southern approach for invading forces to rush up a highway network to Baghdad. By Saturday night, the troops and vehicles were crossing the river and advancing northward.

In Nasiriya, as at Basra, allied forces avoided the city centers, apparently in an effort to reduce casualties.

In Kuwait, at least one American soldier was killed and 13 others wounded in a grenade attack this morning at a rear base camp of the 101st Airborne Division, military officials said.

Separately, seven soldiers died -- six Britons and one American -- when two British helicopters collided over the Persian Gulf, the second helicopter accident in two days.

One journalist covering the war was killed and three were missing. The three journalists, working for a British television station, ITN, were in a vehicle on the outskirts of Basra when it was apparently hit by a shell, witnesses said. An Australian television cameraman was killed when a car bomb exploded at a checkpoint in Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq.

Journalists traveling with Army units said Iraqi troops fired rocket-propelled grenades that tore apart two American Humvees. There were four American soldiers in the vehicles, on a reconnaissance patrol.

Several reports that the soldiers had been killed were not immediately confirmed by the Army.

Another American soldier was wounded by sniper fire in the battle, officials said.

The commander of forces in the region, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, said Special Operations forces were active in and around Baghdad, where Saddam Hussein appeared still in control of the city and its formidable defenses, despite the heavy bombardment of the capital.

General Franks asserted on Saturday that there were ''ongoing dialogues with a number of senior Iraqi officials and those discussions,'' he continued ''both with people in uniform and not in uniform, will continue in the hours and days ahead.''

His remarks implied that there were intense behind-the-scenes efforts to foment a mutiny to eliminate Mr. Hussein and spare a climactic and potentially costly battle for Baghdad.

Intermittent and at times intense fighting was reported from the port of Umm Qasr in the south, which has been in allied hands since early Friday, to the Euphrates valley, where Army and Marine units were attacking key objectives that could soon give them undisputed control over southern Iraq.

But the main battle for the campaign's objective -- the toppling of Mr. Hussein and his government -- still awaited American and British forces to the north, where there was no outward sign Saturday that either the government or military command of Mr. Hussein was wavering.

A second Iraqi division, the 11th Mechanized Infantry, appeared to have collapsed and surrendered after putting up initial resistance in the battle to take the main highway bridge at Nasiriya, military officials said. About 300 prisoners were taken, officials said. Nasiriya itself was bypassed as it became clear that the allies were not interested in battles for towns or cities that can be avoided on the road to Baghdad. The allies intensely focused on speed.

In Basra, a city whose capture the British and American forces had hoped for in the early days of the war, the situation was complex. Fighting raged around the city and air forces bombed key buildings, British officials said.

The missing ITN journalists were identified as Terry Lloyd, a reporter; Fred Nerac, a camera operator; and Hussein Othman, a translator.

General Franks said that the Iraqi Army had placed major weaponry in civilian neighborhoods of Basra, but there were no large concentrations of Iraqi forces there.

He said the goal was to ''work with the civilian population'' and to offer the substantial aid that was expected to begin flowing into the captured port of Umm Qasr as an inducement to Basra's civil administration to welcome forces as liberators rather than occupiers.

Allied aircraft bombed tanks guarding bridges around Basra and American marines captured the airport outside Basra after a battle of unclear duration.

For days, British officials have been preparing journalists to travel to Basra to capture any scenes of jubilation when the population is certain that Mr. Hussein's power has been broken. It was hoped that such scenes would have a strong psychological effect on the rest of the Iraqi population and perhaps offset opposition to the war around the world.

''Our intent is not to move through and create military confrontations in that city,'' General Franks said of Basra. He said the residents of Umm Qasr and Safwan have been enthusiastic about the arrival of allied forces. ''What we have seen up to this point is that the Iraqis are welcoming the forces when they come in,'' General Franks said.

A British military spokesman, Lt. Col. Chris Vernon, also reiterated on Saturday that Basra was not a military objective, but a psychological one in the battle to break Mr. Hussein's hold over a major population center.

In Baghdad, fresh explosions just before nightfall Saturday thundered through the outskirts of the city, after a series of daylight raids. Allied warships in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea were reported by military officials to have fired 600 cruise missiles, a large proportion of them at the capital, in a series of raids that began with a massive bombardment on Friday night.

Mr. Hussein's information minister, Muhammad Said al-Sahhaf, said Saturday on state television that the government remained in control of the country and that images of hundreds of surrendering Iraqi soldiers with their hands raised in surrender were faked. ''Baghdad will remain with its head held high,'' he said. ''The Baghdad of Saddam will remain defiant.''

But General Franks described a campaign that was increasingly spreading to all parts of the country.

''We have operations ongoing in the north, in the west, in the south and in and around Baghdad,'' he said during an afternoon news conference at his headquarters in Doha, Qatar.

The allied objective to secure Iraq's oil fields in the south was mostly successful, General Franks said, adding that only 9 of the 400 oil wells in the strategic Rumaila field had been set on fire before Iraqi forces withdrew.

Iraqi prisoners of war now total between 1,000 and 2,000, General Franks said, another indication that the mass surrender that characterized the 1991 Persian Gulf war had not materialized.

Still, he added, ''thousands more have laid down their weapons and have gone home.''

The Defense Department announced the identities of two American marines killed in action on Friday in southern Iraq. They were Second Lt. Therrel S. Childers, 30, of Harrison, Miss., and Lance Cpl. Jose Guttierez, 22, of Los Angeles, Calif.

Meanwhile, the First Marine Division pushed north to new positions past the Rumaila oil fields and near the Euphrates River. In their path they saw piles of abandoned military boots by the side of the road and clusters of young men in motley garb, some barefoot, plodding along the highway.

''Their officers told them to fire mortars on us and then took off,'' a Marine officer said. ''They are just walking away.'' --------------------

Iraqis Angered by TV Images

By The New York Times

Nic Robertson, the CNN correspondent ordered out of Baghdad on Friday, reported deep frustration on the part of Iraq information officials, who angrily told him the network was ''worse than the American Army'' and that it was to get out of Iraq immediately.

Images of allied military divisions advancing through the south of the country seemed to be taking their toll, he said. ''The Iraqis had been struggling with the images that they'd been seeing on CNN -- images of soldiers surrendering, Bradley fighting vehicles driving up the Iraqi desert,'' he said in an interview. ''They've been trying to tell their own people it's not really happening, this really isn't Iraq.''
