THREATS AND RESPONSES: WHITE HOUSE; U.S. MAY NOT PRESS U.N. FOR A DECISION ON IRAQ FOR WEEKS
By Elisabeth Bumiller and Steven R. Weisman
Jan. 25, 2003

Seeking ways to defuse tensions with longtime European allies, Bush administration officials said today that they were considering a delay of possibly several weeks before pressing the United Nations for a decision about Iraq's compliance with Security Council resolutions.

Administration officials said they were willing to accept a delay to allow inspectors to continue their work in Iraq after they report their findings on Monday. During that time, they said, the administration would try to make a more persuasive case to the allies for possible military action in Iraq.

But the officials made clear that they did not want the inspections to last three or four more months.

The change in tone came after a week in which the administration found itself in a growing confrontation with traditional allies like France and Germany, and opposed in the United Nations Security Council by China and Russia, permanent veto-bearing members.

Faced with rising pressure to lay out the strongest possible case on Iraq, the administration is engaged in a fierce internal debate over how much intelligence information about Iraq's weapons programs to release to the public or to United Nations inspectors searching for incriminating evidence, officials say.

''We've battled the agency on this a dozen times over the last five years,'' an administration official said, referring to the Central Intelligence Agency. ''But now it's more acute because the administration is telling everybody, 'We know more than you do,' and it's not enough. We just cannot get stuff declassified.''

Senior officials at the Defense and State Departments point out that there are severe limits on what they can release to the public and still avoid compromising the people and methods by which they obtained the information.

Officials said they did not know whether President Bush had become involved in any decisions on what to release. But their assumption was that since little intelligence information had been released, the White House had approved the tight clamp on the sensitive information.

In pressing his case in the State of the Union address on Tuesday, White House officials said, Mr. Bush plans to make a vigorous argument against Saddam Hussein. But they said he would stop short of announcing that he is ready to send in troops. They declined to say whether Mr. Bush would present any specific new evidence that Iraq is hiding weapons of mass destruction. Even so, they said he was mindful that he must convince Americans that war is justified if Mr. Hussein does not comply with United Nations resolutions.

''This speech is not to declare war,'' said Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director. ''It's a speech to continue educating the public about why we're taking the course we are.''

Mr. Bartlett added that the president ''will make clear to the American people his reluctance, our country's reluctance, to go to war.''

Despite Mr. Bartlett's words, the White House kept up its now-daily attacks on Mr. Hussein. Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, said this morning that the president viewed Mr. Hussein's refusal to allow the weapons inspectors to interview Iraqi scientists privately as ''unacceptable.'' Mr. Fleischer branded the Iraqi decision a ''willful act of defiance'' and said Mr. Hussein was ''making the end of the line come even closer by his unacceptable behavior.''

At the United Nations, Hans Blix, a chief weapons inspector, expressed frustration today that Iraq had not come forward, during two days of meetings in Baghdad, with crucial evidence the inspectors need. Iraqi officials, he said, had provided only one new document that cast additional light on the status of its past secret programs to build prohibited weapons.

''They gave him virtually nothing, in fact,'' said a United Nations official with knowledge of the inspections.

The Los Angeles Times reported today that the United States and Britain were consulting over whether to extend the inspections in exchange for assurances from allies that they would not drag on indefinitely. But administration officials insisted that there was no specific proposal being discussed.

Administration officials did express a willingness to let the inspections continue for a short time but said this did not amount to a policy shift. ''We've never said the inspections would cease on the 27th,'' a senior administration official said.

But officials also acknowledged that their hope was that the extra weeks might placate the allies, particularly the French, who have mounted a strong campaign to forestall an American attack on Iraq. Officials stressed that they had not approached the allies with any compromise, and it was unclear how the French would react.

The goal now, administration officials said, was to try to bring order to the international chaos before an attack. They said that the continuation of the inspections would merely be an exercise in the inexorable march to war, which could begin in late February or March, and that the inspections were proving useless.

The difficulty in presenting their case against Iraq, officials said, is that the evidence of its weapons stockpiles is heavily inferential and circumstantial, drawn from scores if not hundreds or thousands of tiny clues pieced together by the C.I.A.

This evidence, some officials said, is unlikely to be persuasive to people without an intelligence background, especially if only a half dozen or so pieces out of a hundred are disclosed.

''Much of what we know is akin to an impressionist painting,'' an administration official said. ''It's a compilation of several different strands of information that are then triangulated to draw a conclusion. If you have an intelligence background, it's compelling. If you don't, you might say, 'There's no forest here. It's 400 unrelated trees.' ''

As evidence of the sensitivity over the release of documents, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz told the Council on Foreign Relations this week that he had been forced to substitute three words in his speech for ''two rather stunning paragraphs, on the grounds that we would say too much about what we're observing even today.''

The administration acknowledges that it has a major uphill effort to convince Americans -- not to mention the Europeans -- of the reasons for going to war, but says much of their case comes down to asking Americans to place blind faith in the administration.

''It really comes down to whether or not the country trusts President Bush's judgment, knowing that he knows a lot more than the country knows,'' a senior administration official told reporters on Air Force One this week.

A separate administration disagreement involves the integrity of the work under way in Iraq by the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspections Commission, or Unmovic, which many officials fear has already been compromised by Iraqi agents.

Indeed, some administration officials said they had concluded that sensitive information about a suspected Iraqi weapons site, recently provided to United Nations inspectors, was leaked to Iraqi officials, allowing cleanup crews to be sent to the location.

The unfolding public campaign to persuade Americans, Europeans and others about the importance of disarming Iraq has taken on increasing urgency, with administration officials saying the case to be made on Iraq is their first priority in the next week or so.

Some administration officials acknowledge that their work will be difficult. ''We have not convinced public opinion,'' Richard Haass, director of policy planning at the State Department, said today at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. ''I sit here understanding all too well that we have yet to persuade the international community of where things stand.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is to give a major speech on Iraq to the forum in Davos on Sunday.

In addition to the rhetorical offensive, officials said they were hoping for some new development that would indict Iraq for noncooperation with the the chief weapons inspectors , Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei of the International Atomic Energy Agency, who are to report to the United Nations on Monday.

A bit of doubt was thrown into what the Blix report would say after a spokesman for Mr. ElBaradei said in Vienna that Mr. Hussein would get a ''quite satisfactory'' grade for cooperating with nuclear inspectors. The spokesman, Mark Gwozdecky, told The Associated Press that ''their report card will be a 'B' -- quite satisfactory.''

White House officials were reported to be furious about this comment and pressing the Atomic Energy Agency to rescind it, officials said.
