A NATION AT WAR: THE ATTACK; U.S. AND BRITISH TROOPS PUSH INTO IRAQ AS MISSILES STRIKE BAGHDAD COMPOUND
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 21, 2003

Supported by relentless artillery barrages, American and British armed forces pushed from Kuwait into the Iraqi desert on Thursday as cruise missiles pounded the heart of Baghdad.

The missiles struck an area of Iraqi government buildings on the banks of the Tigris River, sending plumes of black smoke into the sky above a deserted city.

As the Pentagon expressed satisfaction with the results of the early stages of the war, the first American and British casualties were reported. Military officials said 12 British commandos and 4 American marines were killed when their CH-46 Sea Knight helicopter crashed in Kuwait. No further details were immediately available.

The American and British advance into southern Iraq on Thursday followed a raid on Baghdad by stealth fighters and an attack with cruise missiles intended to destabilize the Iraqi government by killing Saddam Hussein. American intelligence officials were trying to determine Thursday night whether any Iraqi leaders had been hit by this first strike of the war. The Pentagon suggested that some senior Iraqi officials might have been killed or wounded.

From land bases across the Arabian Peninsula and the Indian Ocean and from aircraft carriers at sea, American and British warplanes flew through moonlit skies to strike targets, including radar and artillery positions, in southern Iraq.

The attacks on Thursday, while substantial, fell short of the all-out bombardment promised by the Pentagon as the most effective means to force a quick surrender. It appeared that the Pentagon was still exploring the possibility that Mr. Hussein might be ousted without a fight through the defection of the his elite units.

Donald H. Rumsfeld, the defense secretary, said there was still time for the Iraqi Army to surrender and avert an American attack ''of a force and scope and scale beyond what has been seen before.''

The attack today was authorized by President Bush at the conclusion of a meeting in the White House situation room on Wednesday morning, a senior White House official said Thursday night. At the meeting, according to the official's account, Mr. Bush spoke in a video conference with Gen. Tommy R. Franks, head of the United States Central Command, who was at an air base in Saudi Arabia, and other commanders who were scattered across the region.

The president asked each commander whether they had everything they needed to win, and whether they were comfortable with the war plan. At the end of the meeting, the official said, Mr. Bush gave the go-ahead to the commanders to begin the war at the time they judged best, saying, ''For the peace of the world and benefit and freedom of the Iraqi people, I hereby give the order to execute Operation Iraqi Freedom. May God Bless the troops.''

General Franks replied, ''May God bless America,'' and exchanged salutes with the president, who then left the room.

Reporters stationed with or near troops on the front lines in Kuwait reported intense artillery and aerial bombardment that began just before sundown. Bulldozers muscled aside earthen barriers to allow the rush of tanks and thousands of mechanized infantry vehicles under the staccato illumination of muzzle flashes and ordnance bursts.

Hours later, journalists traveling with the Army's Seventh Cavalry reported an engagement with a small Iraqi force of tanks and trucks, which the American force destroyed.

The journalists said the unit was moving at a rate of 25 miles an hour, traveling in Bradley fighting vehicles, and had penetrated dozens of miles into Iraq. Most of the allied troops who crossed into Iraq were outfitted in their full chemical protection suits, gas masks at the ready.

There were no initial reports that Iraqi forces had employed chemical or biological weapons against the advancing allied force.

Armored units from the Army's Third Infantry Division and from the First Marine Expeditionary Force crossed into Iraq at 8 p.m. (noon, Eastern time). Four hours earlier, an armored Marine unit reported the first firefight with Iraqi forces when it encountered two Iraqi armored personnel carriers on the Kuwaiti side of the frontier and destroyed them with machine guns and antitank missiles.

British and American marines had seized the Iraqi border town and port of Umm Qasr south of Basra, Western reporters said. Iraqi television denied that the city had fallen, but an Egyptian journalist, Ashraf Fuad, reached by telephone late Thursday, said he had seen allied forces entering the town under light resistance.

Kuwaiti officials said that at least three Iraqi oil wells had been set on fire in the hours before the invasion. Sheik Thalal al-Khaled Al-Sabah, spokesman for Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, said that around noon on Thursday, Kuwaiti oil field workers near the border ''saw explosions at the wells and fires in the sky'' over Iraq's Ramallah oil field, a strategic asset that United States forces had been seeking to protect.

The assault was preceded by a series of Iraqi missile attacks on military targets in Kuwait, an action that appeared to have accelerated the beginning of combat operations.

At least four medium-range missiles were fired from Iraqi launching sites that had apparently escaped detection during months of pre-war bombing missions over southern Iraq intended to eliminate missile threats to Kuwait and to United States forces here.

Nonetheless, American forces shot down at least two of the incoming missiles, and two others struck in the desert, one near the Ali Salem Air Base and the other near Camp Commando, one of the main staging areas for United States forces.

Another factor that may have advanced the hour of the attack was frantic efforts by Iraqi forces to lay mines in the border region where allied forces were preparing to cross, military officials said.

The ground invasion advanced along at least two vectors: one, spearheaded by the Third Infantry, pushed northwest across the desert on a course that was expected to run along the western flank of the Euphrates River toward Baghdad. A second, led by British and American marines, employed ground and helicopter borne troops to attack on a northeasterly course toward the river and port complex around Basra.

''The British forces have closed the main coastal road and are using it as a helipad to launch their Chinook transport helicopters, and they are flying them into Iraq,'' said Mr. Fuad, the Egyptian journalist, speaking from the border region. He said an American Patriot missile battery, able to shoot down incoming missiles, had been moved closer to the border to protect allied forces.

The First Marine Division, which was expected to join the Army's Third Infantry Division in its drive on Baghdad, opened fire on Iraqi positions at 6:25 p.m. with 155-millimeter howitzer barrages as Cobra helicopter gunships clattered ahead.

The marines focused their early fire on an elevated piece of desert known as Safwan Hill near the Iraqi border town of the same name, which was being defended by the Iraq 51st Mechanized Division. A senior Marine officer confidently predicted that the Iraqi defenders would be ''history within 12 hours.''

A second wave of about 15,000 marines, most of them with the First Marine Division, attacked at 6 a.m. today, apparently breaking and scattering the Iraqis.

''Their officers have cut and run,'' a Marine intelligence colonel said this morning.

American military officials had predicted mass surrender by units of the 51st division, whose soldiers are more poorly equipped and paid than Iraq's frontline Republican Guard divisions.

Military officials reported light resistance in the opening hours of combat. Two crew members of an AH-64 Apache helicopter were injured when the craft crash landed in northern Kuwait. And six crew members of a MH-53 Pave Low special operations helicopter were uninjured when their craft went down in Iraq on Wednesday night.

The helicopter had been engaged in a secret mission. Its crew was recovered,

Explosions were seen in the night sky by journalists near the southern port city of Basra. In northern Iraq, a reporter for the Arabic television station Al Jazeera said Mosul was hit by explosions overnight.

Kuwait's civilian population, which has been host to more than 130,000 troops in its northern desert for months, was kept on edge by air raid sirens that began just after noon and continued to wail almost hourly until early this morning.

Though some Iraqi artillery shells landed in northern Kuwait and damaged buildings, there were no reports of injuries.
