
Oscars Show Goes On, But Mood Is Subdued By the Fighting in Iraq
By Nick Madigan
March 24, 2003

After wrestling for weeks with the prospect of war, Hollywood pressed ahead today with the Academy Awards -- but barely.

The mood, which in a normal year reaches giddy expectation, was soured by the increasingly destructive conflict in Iraq and by pangs of conscience among film industry figures, and the event -- traditionally Hollywood's grandest -- was held against a backdrop of antiwar demonstrations just blocks away that threatened to further disrupt the usually benign proceedings.

''It doesn't make sense that they're doing the show, with all these casualties,'' Karen Pomer, an organizer of the demonstrations, said as she made her way in the early afternoon to Hollywood, where a large police presence waited. ''The juxtaposition of Hollywood going ahead with the Academy Awards while our soldiers and women and children are dying in Iraq is very mystifying -- it's just stunning.''

In deference to such sentiments, officials at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences decided for the first time to not have arriving nominees and their guests parade in full finery along a red carpet before a phalanx of fans and photographers.


''It feels very odd,'' said John Pavlik, the academy's director of communications. ''You walk out there, and it's just different. Usually there'd be red all over the place, and gold, and flowers, and the press. Now, it's just a street.''

Until this morning, there remained a question as to whether the show, in its 75th year, would go on at all. At least two stars scheduled as presenters, Will Smith and Jim Carrey, bowed out, as did Peter Jackson, whose film, ''The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers,'' was a best-picture nominee.

Chris Cooper, who won best supporting actor for ''Adaptation,'' was the first winner tonight to refer to the war. ''In light of all the trouble in this world, I wish us peace.''

Backstage, speaking with reporters, Mr. Cooper said he had been watching war coverage on television earlier in the day. ''As it goes on, I think minds will be changed, one way or the other,'' he said, without elaborating.

Earlier, in the streets just blocks from the Kodak Theater, police holding clubs faced off with demonstrators who were apparently trying to get closer to the theater. None did. Even those who had no political intent had a difficult time approaching the site of the Oscars, and lined up dozens deep to walk through metal detectors for a chance to glimpse an arriving star.

Other protesters, though, succeeded in placing a 10-foot-by-25-foot banner with the words ''No War'' on the wall of a hostel across the street from the theater. Plainclothes police officers were seen entering the building and removing the banner.

Sissy Spacek, nominated for an Oscar last year for ''In the Bedroom,'' said in an interview on Saturday that the war had ''put a pall over everything.''

''It's at the forefront of our minds,'' she said. ''This is not a joyous occasion.''

Hollywood, a town whose most visible figures strive for a cool aura of imperturbability, is not accustomed to having its biggest party tossed into turmoil by world events, although many of its leading figures have vociferously objected to conducting business as usual.

On Saturday, the actors Susan Sarandon and Tim Robbins, alongside the Oscar-nominated Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar, were among several thousand people who marched in Hollywood to protest the war. Their feelings were echoed about the same time by industry figures attending the Independent Spirit Awards in Santa Monica, an event that focuses on independent, or nonstudio, films.

That show, which opened with Elvis Costello singing ''(What's So Funny 'Bout) Peace, Love and Understanding,'' was peppered with comments about the war.

The actress Maggie Gyllenhaal, most recently seen in ''Secretary,'' said the country was ''in the middle of a war about oil and imperialism, and I hope for peace as soon as we can possibly find it.'' Another actor, Dennis Quaid, who accepted an Independent Spirit Award for his work in ''Far From Heaven,'' said, ''I'd like to send out a prayer for peace in the world for the Iraqi people and safekeeping for our troops overseas.''

But as the Bush administration edged closer to war in the last few weeks, much of the debate in Hollywood centered on whether it was unpatriotic, or even appropriate, for famous Hollywood figures -- of a liberal bent more often than not -- to express their views about the impending war. Many regularly outspoken stars, such as Ms. Sarandon and Mike Farrell, had no compunction about marching in antiwar demonstrations, and more than 100 other performers, including Matt Damon, Jessica Lange, Helen Hunt, George Clooney and Danny Glover, signed a letter urging President Bush not to attack Iraq.

For their trouble, the letter's authors were branded as traitors in a flier distributed to talent agencies and production companies in Hollywood by a group supporting the president's effort to oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein.

In an interview on Saturday, the actor Brad Pitt expressed the conflicted feelings of some high-profile people here. ''I don't buy into that stuff about the fact that we're just actors and we should keep our mouths shut,'' he said. ''We're citizens, and I speak as a citizen. I'm sorry we're over there, but Bush made it a global issue and, at this point, I'm sorry to say we've got to get the job done and we'd better back up his case. We're in it, like it or not.''

As the debate simmered over Hollywood's place in the war, the specter of blacklisting, a dark page in the film industry's history, appeared anew, with rumors that actors with vehemently antiwar views would suffer when it came time to casting.

Last month, the actor Sean Penn filed a lawsuit accusing Steve Bing, the writer and director of ''Why Men Shouldn't Marry,'' set to start filming here in August, of reneging on a deal to pay him $10 million to star in the film after Mr. Penn stated his opposition to a United States-led invasion of Iraq and visited Baghdad in December. Mr. Bing countersued, contending that Mr. Penn left the project of his own accord.

Martin Sheen, who has never hidden his antiwar stance, even as he plays a president on NBC's ''West Wing,'' told reporters recently that network executives had informed him that they were ''very uncomfortable'' with his opposition to the Bush administration's plans in Iraq. The network denied this.

Earlier this month, the Screen Actors Guild released a statement that said a ''disturbing trend'' had arisen in the debate over the war.

''Some have recently suggested that well-known individuals who express 'unacceptable' views should be punished by losing their right to work,'' the statement said, without specifying who had done the suggesting. ''This shocking development suggests that the lessons of history have, for some, fallen on deaf ears.''

In an interview at a lunch given last week by the academy for its nominees, the actress Renée Zellweger, nominated as best actress for ''Chicago,'' said it was everyone's right to speak out, but she cautioned against making off-the-cuff statements on matters about which little may be known.

''It's a tricky situation whenever a person takes a position; they should be certain that they're well informed,'' Ms. Zellweger said. ''Otherwise they do a huge disservice to the cause that they're trying to support. I'm the first one to say I'm highly opinionated and totally uninformed, but I watch the news in different countries around the world and I try to stay on top of it. What I want to know is, why aren't people asking questions? Why aren't people asking why?''

Nicole Kidman, one of Ms. Zellweger's competitors in the best-actress category for ''The Hours,'' said at the lunch that she was of two minds about whether the Academy Awards should be presented during wartime. On the one hand, she said, ''you need to continue on,'' but on the other, ''it would feel very strange to show up.''

At the same event, John C. Reilly, a nominee in the supporting-actor category for ''Chicago,'' implied that it would be inappropriate to say anything political at the Oscars. ''There's always a time and place,'' he said. ''The way to make your voice heard in this country is to vote.''
