THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; BUSH IS EXPECTED TO SAY IRAQ FAILED TO MEET U.N. TERMS
By David E. Sanger With Julia Preston
Dec. 18, 2002


The White House is expected to declare on Thursday that Iraq has violated the United Nations resolution requiring it to disclose all its weapons of mass destruction, senior administration officials said today.

At a national security meeting scheduled for Wednesday morning, President Bush will consider whether to declare Iraq in ''material breach'' of its obligations, the officials said.

A senior State Department nonproliferation official, John S. Wolf, met this morning with Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations inspection team for chemical and biological weapons, to describe the deficiencies that American intelligence agencies say they have found in the Iraqi declaration that says Iraq does not possess weapons of mass destruction or long-range missiles.

The issues confronting Mr. Bush -- particularly the question of whether the time is right to declare a ''material breach,'' which could provide what Washington sees as a legal justification for going to war -- were discussed in detail at a meeting of his senior national security advisers in the White House situation room this afternoon, according to several officials. The president did not attend the meeting of the group, known as the principals, which usually includes the secretaries of state and defense, Vice President Dick Cheney and other officials.

In interviews tonight, those officials refused to say what options the group had decided to present to Mr. Bush. But a consensus appeared to be developing that Iraq's failure so far to explain what happened to its chemical and biological weapons programs after 1998 -- and its contention that all work on nuclear weapons stopped a decade ago -- should be characterized as evidence that Iraq is engaged in what one official called ''not so passive resistance'' to a full inspection by the United Nations.

American intelligence officials say the extensive arms documentation that Iraq issued earlier this month lacks evidence that it disposed of chemical and biological weapons that United Nations inspectors had identified prior to 1998, or that the inspectors suspected still existed when they left Iraq under duress that year.

Administration officials have not produced evidence that Iraq has nuclear weapons, but say President Saddam Hussein is thought to have acquired equipment that would aid in the development of such arms. The officials said they did not expect that the violations would be described by Mr. Bush as an immediate cause for war, but rather as a ''serious matter'' and evidence that Iraq was again engaging in hide-and-seek with inspectors.

''What you will see will be a patient White House, very concerned about another failure by Iraq to cooperate but willing to allow the weapons inspections to go ahead,'' said one administration official familiar with the debate. Another said the administration would use the omissions to step up pressure on the United Nations to demand interviews with Iraqi scientists outside of Iraq, fully expecting that Mr. Hussein would resist those interviews.

Today's meeting between Mr. Wolf and Mr. Blix, which was not announced publicly, was the first time the administration had laid out to the United Nations its assessment of the inadequacies of the Iraqi declaration. Though Mr. Wolf did not fully disclose the data backing up the United States analysis of the Iraqi document, ''we gave him the thrust with some examples,'' one administration official said of the session. The American ambassador to the United Nations, John D. Negroponte, was also present.

Senior White House officials insisted tonight that the principal advisers, who include Mr. Cheney, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, had made no specific recommendations to Mr. Bush. Asked if the group had agreed that Iraq was in ''material breach'' of its obligations, Sean McCormack, a spokesman for the National Security Council, said, ''No such decisions have been taken by the United States government at any principals' meeting, whether today or at any other time.''

The debate over how to characterize Iraqi violations is important because it may determine how many allies join the United States in any eventual conflict.

Mr. Bush, some aides expect, will take a cautious approach, denouncing Iraq but stopping short of any pre-emptive action. Most likely, some officials say, is that the president will declare that what Washington sees as Iraq's failure to account for missing chemical and biological weapons, and Baghdad's declaration that all its nuclear weapons research has stopped, are the latest in a series of steps that violate Security Council Resolution 1441.

''I don't expect the president will say that this alone is casus belli,'' a cause for war, said one administration official. ''But it builds the case.''

The immediate effect of the administration's declaration, officials say, will be to put enormous new pressure on Iraq, the Security Council and the United Nations inspectors, especially in the matter of interviewing Iraqi scientists.

The administration's private insistence that Iraq has committed a new and grave violations of its promises puts it on a course to differ sharply with Secretary General Kofi Annan and most if not all the other permanent members of the Security Council, including Britain, Washington's closest ally.

Once again today, Mr. Annan repeated his admonition that the weapons inspectors should be allowed to carry on with their work at their own pace. ''I think as I've said before: we need to give Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei time to analyze these documents,'' Mr. Annan said, referring to Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief of the team performing nuclear inspections. ''I think we should wait for that.'' He added that the inspectors ''have a mandate and they should carry on with it.''

Mr. Blix is to provide his first assessment of the Iraqi declaration to the Security Council on Thursday. The White House is planning a simultaneous announcement of its views.

Mr. Blix informed the Council late Monday that he would not give a full assessment of the vast declaration when he and Mr. ElBaradei meet the group on Thursday. Rather, Mr. Blix said, he intends to provide a preliminary overview and a guide for the 10 nonpermanent Council members to study the documents.

Administration officials were adamant last night that Mr. Bush has made no final decisions, though as one official said earlier in the day, ''It's clear that Thursday will be a big day for us.'' The debate, said one participant, ''isn't over whether Iraq falsified its claims -- it's over how to prove that, and how best to bring along the maximum number of allies to the same conclusion.''

In an effort to convince other members of the Security Council, several senior officials said they thought Mr. Bush would defer the question of whether the omissions themselves are a sufficient legal pretext for military action, under the American interpretation of Resolution 1441.

The Russian ambassador to the United Nations, Sergey Lavrov, insisted this week that only the weapons inspectors had the authority to determine whether a serious breach had been committed or not.

''It is not for Russia or anybody else to make any judgments'' until the inspectors render their evaluations, Mr. Lavrov said. If something happens that Mr. Blix ''believes is a violation, he comes to the Security Council,'' he added. ''There is no other way, and everybody knows it.''

French diplomats have also argued that it is up to Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to evaluate Iraq's conduct, not individual Council nations. France will also stick to the letter of Resolution 1441, which says that ''false statements or omissions in the declarations . . . and failure by Iraq at any time to comply with, and cooperate fully in the implementation of, this resolution shall constitute a further material breach.''

In the view of France, the clause means that missing data and less than candid statements are not enough to cause a ''material breach,'' diplomats said today, if there is no other pattern of defiance by Baghdad.

British leaders have also accepted that interpretation, which was fundamental to getting France's accord for the resolution.

The 10 rotating members of the Security Council received their copies of the declaration this evening, after the documents had been filtered by United Nations experts for information that could provide a guide for making weapons of mass destruction. The five permanent members, all nuclear powers, received the declaration on Dec. 8.
