THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE EUROPEANS; With Iraq Stance, Chirac Strives for Relevance
By Alan Riding
Feb. 23, 2003

What drives Jacques Chirac?

As Mr. Chirac, the French president, leads resistance to American plans to use force if necessary to disarm Iraq, many French analysts are looking beyond this crisis to the man himself, and they identify a broader agenda. They see him bent on securing his place in history by forging a prominent role for France in the post-cold-war world.

''Chirac has a vision of how he'd like the world to be,'' said Pierre Lellouche, a conservative Parliament member who was Mr. Chirac's foreign affairs adviser in the early 1990's. ''He sees a multipolar world in which Europe is the counterweight to American political and military power. In Europe, he sees a position of leadership for France. And he sees Europe as a bridge between the developing and developed world.''

For some political analysts, this might look like another exercise in nostalgia for lost French glory. But Mr. Chirac, it seems, sees France in a decisive struggle to assert its relevance in the new world defined by the end of the cold war, the emergence of the United States as the sole superpower and the changes wrought in Europe by both German unification and by the imminent expansion of the European Union.

France, many analysts believe, is now less sure of its place in the world than in the 1970's and 1980's when, with Germany, it routinely defined Europe's political direction. Today Germany no longer lives in the Soviet shadow and feels more confident politically. Many French, in contrast, view Europe's integration with growing skepticism.

''I think last year's elections convinced him that France was suffering an identity crisis,'' said Raphaëlle Bacqué, author of the political biography, ''Chirac or the Demon of Power,'' published early last year. ''So one traditional way of repairing the French identity is to make France exist vis-à-vis the United States, exploiting the undercurrent of anti-Americanism that has always existed here.''

At age 70, four years from retirement, Mr. Chirac is in a hurry -- all the more since he wrecked his first chance of bringing change. After unsuccessful runs for the presidency in 1981 and 1988 and after 18 years as mayor of Paris, he finally reached the Élysée Palace in 1995. He quickly asserted French independence by resuming nuclear testing in the Pacific.

Two years later, however, he committed a blunder: he called early legislative elections, and the Socialist opposition swept into government. For the next five years, he lacked any real power and became embroiled in corruption cases dating back to his years as Paris mayor. When he ran for re-election last year, his main rival wrote him off as ''aged, wasted, tired.''

Yet last spring, he not only won re-election for a five-year term, but his neo-Gaullist party also seized control of both the National Assembly and the Senate. For some in his circle, it was as if a rejuvenated Mr. Chirac was starting his presidency anew.

He appointed a little-known politician, Jean-Pierre Raffarin, to be prime minister with the job of running day-to-day government affairs. Then, confident of his clout as the West's most experienced political leader, Mr. Chirac turned to foreign affairs. He named his most trusted aide, Dominique de Villepin, once described by a government official as ''the son Chirac never had,'' to be his foreign minister. According to political experts, Mr. de Villepin has further encouraged Mr. Chirac to give France a higher international profile.

For Mr. Chirac himself, the Iraqi crisis involves a fundamental principle: war should be the very last resort. But domestic politics also play a role. Polls indicate that over 80 percent of French are strongly opposed to both an Iraq war and any unilateral display of American military might.

Another political reality is that five million Muslims live in France. Mr. Chirac may fear ''that a wave of anti-Americanism in the Muslim world will translate into a storm of anti-Westernism that will affect France,'' said one retired French ambassador who knows him well.

Mr. Chirac himself never misses a chance to reiterate his affection for the United States. Yet while he insists that the United States is better served by honest and frank friends than by sycophants, an all-powerful United States also stands in the way of his long-term vision for France and Europe. The American leadership's penchant for ignoring European views on such topics as global warming and an international criminal court has only underlined Europe's waning influence.

As it happens, it was Germany, not France, that first distanced itself from the United States over Iraq when Chancellor Gerhard Schröder pledged during his re-election campaign last summer not to join any invasion of Iraq. But when the Bush administration stepped up its war plans in the fall, it was France that tried to stay the American hand in the United Nations Security Council, where as a permanent member it has a right of veto. Since then, it has become the leader of antiwar opinion.

''I think Chirac would have preferred more dialogue,'' said Pierre Moscovici, minister of European affairs in the former Socialist government. ''I'm not sure the confrontation pleases him. He's not a traditional Gaullist and he's not anti-American. But on Iraq, I believe he is convinced that war is not justified.''

Mr. Chirac's stance has provoked a furious anti-French backlash in conservative circles in the United States and Britain, but it has also brought dividends, not least support from many countries that also fear the American approach. This week, 52 African countries attending a French-African summit meeting in Paris endorsed the French position.

But Mr. Chirac's effort to take a leadership role on Iraq has opened deep divisions within Europe, in part because France is suspected of having a hidden agenda to restore French-German domination of Europe.

As a result, the battle within Europe over Iraq has also become the battle over Europe's future, and there Mr. Chirac's power play appears to have backfired. Not only have Spain, Italy, Portugal and Denmark followed Britain's lead in backing the United States, but 13 former Communist countries, including the 8 scheduled to join the European Union in 2004, have also supported Washington.

On Monday, after a meeting in Brussels at which European leaders papered over their differences on Iraq, Mr. Chirac's frustration spilled over. He said the countries seeking European Union membership had ''missed a good opportunity to remain silent.'' Those countries were shaken, but Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain quickly wrote to them expressing his admiration. That not only deepened tensions with Britain but also undermined further the idea of a common European foreign and defense policy.

Even in France, Mr. Chirac's tirade did not go uncriticized. ''Who 'missed a good opportunity to remain silent?' '' wrote Patrick Sabatier in a signed editorial in the left-of-center daily Libération. ''Answer: Jacques Chirac.'' Mr. Sabatier said the president had treated the ''other Europe'' with the same disdain as Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld had shown when he spoke of ''old Europe.''

Within Mr. Chirac's party, there were also expressions of concern. ''Chirac's approach presumes everyone shares France's view,'' one conservative leader said. ''But the rest of Europe doesn't want France in the driver's seat.''

The more immediate question is how France will vote when the United States and Britain present a new resolution on Iraq at the Security Council. But some French politicians are also beginning to ask whether Mr. Chirac has prepared an exit strategy that will enable France to mend its ties with Washington and London as well as preserve France's political gains. Outside Élysée Palace, it is still anyone's guess how Mr. Chirac will next define French interests.

PROFILE

Jacques Chirac

BORN -- Nov. 29, 1932, in Paris.

EDUCATION -- Institut d'Études Politiques, 1953; École Nationale d'Administration, 1959. Attended Harvard University, summer 1953.

MILITARY SERVICE -- Officer in French Army, 1954-57. Wounded in combat in colonial Algeria.

POLITICAL CAREER

1967: Elected to National Assembly on Gaullist ticket.

1967-68: State Secretary for Social Affairs.

1968-71: State Secretary for the Economy and Finance.

1971-72: Minister Delegate (Prime Minister's Office) with responsibility for relations with Parliament.

1973-74: Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development.

1974: Minister of the Interior.

1974-76: Prime Minister.

1977-95: Mayor of Paris.

1981: First unsuccessful run for president.

1986-88: Prime Minister.

1988: Second unsuccessful run for president.

1995 to present: President.
