THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUNTING FOR WEAPONS; ARMS INSPECTORS IN IRAQ TO DEPLOY NEW TECHNOLOGY
By William J. Broad
Nov. 13, 2002


In the four years since United Nations weapons inspectors left Iraq, the digital revolution has made their gear smaller, lighter, faster, more precise and easier to use. Millions of dollars in commercial and antiterrorism funds are accelerating the rush of technology, opening new vistas for weapons sleuthing.

Experts say the advances are giving the inspectors a technical edge in the hide-and-seek world of Iraqi weapons, as well as new leverage to disarm Iraq.

Among the new developments are these:

*Commercial spy satellites so powerful that their photos can reveal details of factories, buildings and arsenals.

*Miniature sensors that can constantly monitor the air, water and soil for telltale signs of weapons of mass destruction.

*Newly portable germ detectors that can quickly check installations for anthrax, plague and other deadly biological agents.

*Powerful radar systems that can penetrate the ground to scan for signs of tunnels and underground bunkers.

Human knowledge and experience will still be paramount in any inspection regime, Hans Blix, head of the United Nations inspection teams, recently told trainees in Vienna, according to transcripts made public by the United Nations. But, he went on, ''powerful new means of verification'' are now coming into play.

His view was supported by military analysts who pointed out that if the equipment can find strong evidence of prohibited weapons work, rather than weak or ambiguous clues, that could prove important in making the case for action against the government of President Saddam Hussein.

But even as Mr. Blix hailed technology's new power, military analysts emphasize that Iraqi weapons makers have had four years to refine their deceptions and thoroughly understand the United Nations approach.

As one Defense Intelligence Agency expert, John Yurechko, said recently of the Iraqis, ''They now have experienced the inspection regime'' and have whetted skills to counter it.

Weapons inspections began in Iraq in 1991, but after repeated failures of cooperation between the United Nations and Baghdad, the inspectors left in December 1998, hours before the United States and Britain began three days of air strikes.

Four years later, questions abound over what Baghdad has done during the inspection hiatus. The Defense Intelligence Agency, in a worst-case estimate, says Iraq may be rebuilding its nuclear program, renewing production of deadly nerve agents like sarin and VX, and racing to make germ weapons.

''Most elements are larger and more advanced than before the gulf war,'' the agency said of Baghdad's germ warfare effort.

Before the 1991 war, according to the United Nations, Iraq made at least 5,125 gallons of botulinum toxin, the deadliest substance known to science, and 2,245 gallons of anthrax agent -- enough to kill everyone on earth several times over.

The United Nations now has about 250 experts trained to search Iraq for weapons of mass destruction. About 100 of them will be on the mission at any one time.

Some weapons experts say the technical edge may help newer inspectors compensate for their relative lack of experience.

But Tim McCarthy, who went to Iraq 15 times as a missile inspector and now works at the Monterey Institute of International Studies, was cautious about the new technologies, pointing out that they could also beguile with the hope of quick breakthroughs while ultimately wasting time and financial resources.

''There's lots of whiz-bang gadgets out there, and sometimes they don't get you to the central issues,'' he said.

A vital tool, Mr. McCarthy added, is the interview. Hundreds of Iraqi scientists are thought to know about programs to develop biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, and inspectors who interview them must develop the knack to detect a lie.

''It comes down to the nose,'' Mr. McCarthy said.

United Nations officials would not describe the new surveillance technologies in detail, for fear of tipping their hand. For example, Ewen Buchanan, spokesman for the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, said making public the exact specifications for, say, a laser sensor, might let the Iraqis develop ways to confuse it.

''The sensors are much more sensitive,'' Mr. Buchanan said. ''Camera resolution is better. Equipment that might have needed a room now might fit into a briefcase.''

The general advances, experts said, are driven by the same digital revolution that has drastically increased the power of computers, cellphones and cameras. In tandem with these changes, new interest and redirected government financing have brought rapid advances in weapons detection.

''Four years ago the interest in defending against chemical and biological arms wasn't nearly as great,'' said K. David Nokes, head of national security programs at the Sandia National Laboratories, based in Albuquerque, N.M.

Germ detectors, too, have dramatically improved. The most accurate ones map a microbe's genetic material with the same kind of equipment used to decode the human genome. In 1998, when the inspectors left Iraq, only large laboratories could do such analyses.

But by 2001, after years of biodefense funding, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California had perfected a two-pound device known as Hanaa, for Hand-Held Advanced Nucleic Acid Analyzer, which can recognize a microbe by its DNA, helping eliminate identification failures and false positives.

''Having sensitive detection technology like Hanaa is very useful,'' said Page O. Stoutland, a Livermore counterterrorism official. ''The traditional way is to take lots of samples and then send those home. But that takes days or weeks to sort out.''

By contrast, he said, Hanaa, now being made commercially, works in about 20 minutes, ''letting you go back quickly if you get an interesting reading.''

Miniaturization has also shrunk radiation detectors, which can help track nuclear materials. The inspectors have acquired two types made by Quantrad Sensors, a company in Madison, Wis. Its portable Ranger unit can detect several radioactive isotopes, while its Alex unit can identify a wide range of metals with potential nuclear uses.

''They're simple to use,'' said Martin Janiak, the company's head. ''You turn them on and go.''

As for the new commercial satellites, which came into being in 1999 and now number a half-dozen, their cameras can see objects on the ground as small as two feet wide, revealing roads, buildings, pipelines, bridges, tanks, jets and missiles. The United Nations is using images from at least two of the commercial craft, officials said, and began experimenting with them about two years ago.

While countries at times supply the United Nations with images from their own reconnaissance satellites, a United Nations report last year praised the new self-reliance. ''Material from multiple sources,'' it said, ''serves to provide the commission with a broader and independent assessment capability.''

In September, after studying photos of Iraq, weapons inspectors identified several nuclear-related areas of new construction or other unexplained changes. ''We are very curious to see what is under the roof,'' said Jacques Baute, leader of the nuclear inspectors.

A newer technology on the horizon is pilotless reconnaissance drones, which the Security Council has allowed under the resolution adopted last Friday on new Iraq inspections. Among other things, the American military has used the drones for photographic surveillance.

Private experts said drones or piloted surveillance craft might carry gear to help the inspectors find underground bunkers, a top issue on the agenda.

Last year, an Iraqi defector who described himself as a civil engineer said in an interview that he personally worked on secret installations for biological, chemical and nuclear arms in underground vaults. Other Western intelligence has echoed that theme.

Special radar systems can penetrate the ground. Other devices can detect variations in the earth's gravitational field, revealing underground voids. Still other sensors can detect magnetic fields generated by electrical gear in tunnels up to 100 feet deep.

Tim Brown of GlobalSecurity.org, a private group in Alexandria, Va., said it was very likely such equipment would be used in Iraq. ''If they don't go in with something like that,'' he said, ''they're not going to be perceived as serious.''

In a talk last month in Vienna, Mr. Blix of the United Nations said the new inspections, aided by the new technologies, could be thorough but not perfect in ferreting out hidden Iraqi arms.

''It is not possible to examine every square meter in a big country, or every basement, or every computer program, or archive, or every truck on the road,'' he said. ''All that is attainable is a high degree of assurance that there are no malign bugs or bombs.''
