THREATS AND RESPONSES: LEGISLATION; CONGRESS NEARING DRAFT RESOLUTION ON FORCE IN IRAQ
By Todd S. Purdum and Elisabeth Bumiller
Sept. 27, 2002


The White House and the Congressional leadership proposed new terms today for a resolution authorizing President Bush to use military force in Iraq, dropping language that many members considered too broad and imposing new procedural conditions.

At the same time, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told Congress that the administration had reached agreement with Britain on the draft of a tough new United Nations Security Council resolution. American and British officials said the measure would require President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to show cooperation with weapons inspectors within a period of about two months or face military consequences.

The new draft of the Congressional resolution dropped a phrase originally proposed by the White House that would have authorized the use of military force to ''restore international peace and security in the region,'' which many members complained could include the entire Middle East. It also added new requirements that the president report to Congress in the event of war. [Text, Page A18.]

Administration officials began circulating the new draft after President Bush, in a meeting at the White House with Republican and Democratic lawmakers, tried to allay Democratic anger at his suggestion early this week that the Senate was ''not interested in the security of the American people.'' Today, Mr. Bush softened his tone, saying, ''The security of our country is the commitment of both political parties.''

At a Houston event tonight, Mr. Bush revealed the depth of his personal feelings on Iraq when he described Mr. Hussein as ''a guy that tried to kill my dad at one time.''

The Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle, who on Wednesday bitterly accused the president of politicizing the issues of Iraq and national security, said today that efforts to draft a resolution that could attract broad support had been made ''much harder'' by the earlier partisan acrimony. Republicans said they had believed that the political fight would slow negotiations and were surprised at the level of progress made on a draft resolution.

Even as the White House sought to dampen partisan fires, Mr. Bush was the target of criticism from former Vice President Al Gore, who charged that some administration security measures in the past year amounted to an ''attack on civil liberties.''

''What's going on nationally, with the attack on civil liberties, with American citizens in some cases just disappearing without right to counsel, without access to a lawyer, I think that is disgraceful,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech in Wilmington, Del.

As for Mr. Bush, at the fund-raising event in Houston tonight he made clear the strength of his motivation to move against Iraq. ''There's no doubt his hatred is mainly directed at us,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Hussein. ''There's no doubt he can't stand us. After all, this is a guy that tried to kill my dad at one time.''

On the two resolutions, much remained unsettled, both on Capitol Hill and at the United Nations. Mr. Daschle said he would bring the Congressional resolution to the floor next week, but added, ''We've got a long way to go.'' Secretary Powell dispatched a top aide to lobby France and Russia to support the proposed Security Council resolution, but acknowledged, ''We're a long way from getting agreement.''

In another sign of unease among Democrats, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who has not spoken out in detail on Iraq, is to make a speech on Friday criticizing the administration's approach and warning that it has not yet made the case for a unilateral strike.

As the administration pressed its case to skeptical allies and wary lawmakers, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld told reporters that American intelligence had found ''solid evidence'' of the presence of senior members of Al Qaeda in Baghdad ''in recent periods,'' though he did not identify them and said they might have left by now.

The new draft of the Congressional resolution includes language lifted from the 1991 measure authorizing force in the gulf war. It declares that Congress views such authorization as covered by the War Powers Resolution, which was passed after the Vietnam War to limit presidential ability to wage war without Congressional assent. Although presidents since then have insisted that they were not bound by the act, they have complied with its provisions anyway.

The draft also requires the president, before using force ''or as soon thereafter as may be feasible,'' to explain formally to Congress that diplomacy alone would not protect national security or enforce United Nations resolutions on Iraqi disarmament and other issues.

Top Republican leaders endorsed the new draft and said they would resist further changes.

''Any further erosion, I think, is going to be a problem,'' the Senate Republican leader, Trent Lott of Mississippi, said. He also said the negotiations between the White House and leaders of both parties from both chambers had ''reached a point where there is good language and we should go forward with it.''

But in the House, a spokesman for Richard A. Gephardt, the minority leader, said Mr. Gephardt believed that a ''few minor changes'' could make the resolution acceptable to a much broader cross section of lawmakers. ''Our understanding is negotiations are not over,'' the spokesman said.

A senior White House official said, ''Here's how I'd describe it: Progress has been made, and the talks are ongoing, and nothing is final until everything is final.''

As the domestic political wrangling continued, Secretary Powell told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that a strong Congressional resolution would buttress his efforts to win passage of a new Security Council resolution holding Iraq to account. He sent Marc Grossman, the under secretary of state for political affairs, to Paris, and then Moscow, to press the case.

Russia and France each hold veto power on the Security Council, and officials said Mr. Grossman would present the joint British-American language privately in an effort to win support, before the draft was circulated next week at the United Nations. Secretary Powell said he had telephoned the foreign ministers of Russia, France and China in the last 24 hours seeking support.

Secretary Powell told the committee that the new resolution must declare Iraq in violation of past United Nations resolutions requiring disarmament; tell Iraq what it must do to comply; and threaten consequences for noncompliance.

The United States and Britain are seeking a resolution that not only calls for thorough arms inspections, but also requires Mr. Hussein to dismantle any weapons that inspectors may find -- one that explicitly threatens the use of force if he does not cooperate.

Washington wants language saying that Iraq is in ''material breach'' of many Security Council resolutions and demanding that it fulfill all its requirements or face military attack.

The final global diplomatic push on the resolution came after American officials realized that resistance to their terms in Paris and Moscow was too deep to overcome in negotiations at the United Nations.

As it sought to bolster its case for the urgency of action against Iraq, the administration offered a range of fresh accusations and commentary seeking to emphasize possible links between the Hussein government and Al Qaeda -- a topic on which it has offered conflicting statements in the past.

Reports of such links have increased since 1998, Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''We have what we believe to be credible information that Iraq and Al Qaeda have discussed safe haven opportunities in Iraq, reciprocal nonaggression discussions,'' he said. ''We have what we consider to be credible evidence that Al Qaeda leaders have sought contacts in Iraq who could help them acquire weapons of mass destruction capabilities.''

Mr. Rumsfeld said he had viewed a single report ''indicating that Iraq provided unspecified training relating to chemical and/or biological matters for Al Qaeda members.'' Other intelligence information supports that report, but comes from less reliable sources.

He also cautioned that intelligence on Al Qaeda's ties with Iraq was ''based on a lot of different types of sources of varying degrees of reliability.'' He said some of the new data came from suspected Qaeda and Taliban fighters in detention.

Asked today about new statements on Qaeda-Iraq links, Mr. Daschle said they amounted to ''a reversal of information that the administration shared with us earlier this year.''
