
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; BUSH TEAM URGES BOLD INSPECTIONS OF IRAQ'S ARSENAL
By Steven R. Weisman
Oct. 21, 2002


The Bush administration, anticipating approval of a United Nations Security Council resolution that falls short of what it was seeking, is now pressing harder than ever for inspections of Iraq's weapons program to be carried out quickly and forcefully. Administration officials say the goal is to prevent months of delay that could postpone retaliation for Iraq's noncompliance.

Delays could occur if inspectors take their time in choosing hundreds of sites or visiting places that yield little conclusive evidence of Iraq's weapons programs, the officials say.

The administration has always sought a rapid inspection timetable in principle. But American officials have intensified their efforts in the last few weeks in their meetings with Mr. Blix as the likelihood has increased for a new United Nations resolution.

A major factor in the need for speed, officials said, is the ''window'' for military action against Iraq. Military officials and other experts say the optimal time for using troops is the winter months, before the heat and sand storms set in. This means that such action would have to begin between December and February.

''This is not going to be a matter of waiting six months to see what happens,'' said an administration official, referring to the inspections process. ''It's going to be a matter of watching every day to see what the Iraqis do.''

Negotiations to hammer out a Security Council resolution are said to be close to fruition, at least on the question of whether force should be authorized now, as the United States wants, or whether authorization of force should be put off and decided later in a second resolution months from now, which is the approach sought by France and others.

Appearing on television talk shows today, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, said language on a resolution could be presented this week.

The goal of the United States is to have the resolution refer to unspecified ''consequences'' -- which could be interpreted as the use of force -- if Iraq fails to comply with the inspections and disarmament demands. At the same time, the United States would implicitly accept the idea of a role by the Security Council in determining what the consequences should be.

But diplomats involved in the talks on the resolution say that, on a parallel track, the United States wants the resolution to ensure that the inspections themselves are aggressive. For example, some in the Bush administration continue to want the inspectors to include American officials who can point them to the right places, and to have their own armed security guards to enforce the inspections, in case there are confrontations with Iraqi forces.

United Nations diplomats are raising doubts about both those ideas. They are concerned that the use of armed guards would be needlessly provocative, and are worried that the Bush administration may be looking for a confrontation to serve as an excuse to call for military force against Iraq.

The idea of having American experts accompany the United Nations team has taken the form of a proposal that inspectors from all five permanent members of the Security Council -- France, Russia, China and Britain as well as the United States -- take part.

But some diplomats sympathetic to the notion of aggressive inspections say that idea is not well thought out. Their fear is that Russian and Chinese officials might actually impede the process, perhaps by tipping off the Iraqis about the inspectors' plans.

Timing is the main issue being discussed intensively between the United States and the inspections team, which is led by Hans Blix, the executive chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, also known as Unmovic.

Both Secretary Powell and Ms. Rice, in their television appearances today, emphasized the need for inspections to provide a quick test of Mr. Hussein's intentions. ''The world is going to have to have a zero-tolerance view if he is unwilling to cooperate this time,'' said Ms. Rice, on CNN's ''Late Edition.'' She said the United States would not tolerate a delay of even two hours between a request to inspect a site and the inspection itself because it would allow Iraqis to destroy documents.

Secretary Powell said on the ABC News program ''This Week'' that once it became clear that the inspectors could not function, ''they're going to come home'' right away. ''Either Iraq cooperates and we get this disarmament done through peaceful means, or they do not cooperate and we will use other means to get the job done,'' he said.

Experts on inspections say there will be a fine line between having aggressive and intrusive inspections and doing something that is deliberately provocative in order to create a pretext for military action.

''If there is a stalemate on inspections, it could be that the inspectors will have to stage some kind of provocation,'' said Victor Mizin, a former Russian diplomat who worked as an inspector in Iraq in the 1990's. ''The alternative is wait and hope that the Iraqis commit some kind of mistake and create an incident themselves.''

Secretary Powell has had several meetings with Mr. Blix, most recently last week in New York. Aides to Secretary Powell say that although Mr. Blix had a reputation among some as too compliant toward Iraq in the 1990's, they are satisfied now that he understands the need for speed and intrusiveness.

''We're impressed with them,'' said a State Department official, referring to Mr. Blix and his team. ''We've been meeting with these guys for a while, and we think they're quite capable and quite aggressive.''

It was considered a breakthrough in Washington when Secretary Powell and Mr. Blix agreed earlier this month that inspectors would not go into Iraq until a new Security Council resolution was approved removing restrictions on the inspections as they applied to eight so-called presidential palaces. No one expects to find weapons at the places, officials say. Rather the hope is that they will find documents and computer discs indicating where weapons are being produced.

After approval of a resolution, inspections would begin within weeks, focusing initially on sites selected by the Iraqis themselves, an official in Mr. Blix's office said. Within 60 days, the inspection team would produce its own list of ''key tasks'' going beyond the list of sites produced by the Iraqis.

''We have to do a credible job,'' this official said. ''We must have immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access not just to sites, but also to documents and individuals.''

Access to individuals is another big issue for the Americans. President Bush has said he wants the inspectors to be able to take individual scientists and others outside Iraq for interviews. American officials say that on this point the United States is unlikely to accept a compromise.

The reason is that during the inspections in the late 1990's, inspectors said that when they found someone willing to cooperate, that person would suddenly disappear and the team feared he had been imprisoned or tortured. Some inspectors said they were constantly haunted by the concern of hurting the families of those Iraqis who cooperated with them.

The United Nations inspection team consists of 220 professionals from 45 countries trained over the last two years; it will grow to 270 this year. The first team to go into Iraq will comprise 80 to 100 experts, who would stay in Iraq for three or four months and then rotate out.

Mr. Mizin, the former Russian diplomat who is now the diplomat in residence at the Center for Nonproliferation Studies at the Monterey Institute in California, said there was concern that these professionals were not as experienced and that they would not be as diligent as the teams that went into Iraq some years ago.

But Mr. Blix's office defends the group as superior to previous teams because it includes members from a wider range of countries, notably Eastern Europeans and Russians with expertise in nuclear and biological and chemical weapons. Moreover, an aide to Mr. Blix said, these experts would have the advantage of being international civil servants rather than nationals from their own countries, and therefore more likely to be accepted by the Iraqis.
