THREATS AND RESPONSES: WASHINGTON; U.S. READY TO BACK NEW U.N. MEASURE ON IRAQ, BUSH SAYS
By Eric Schmitt With Julia Preston
Feb. 7, 2003

The United States stepped up the political and military pressure on Iraq today, signaling that it would welcome a second United Nations resolution authorizing war to disarm Baghdad. It also ordered the 101st Airborne Division to the Persian Gulf, where more than 100,000 American troops are massed, a total that could double by the end of the month.

President Bush said he was open to seeking a new Security Council resolution to support using military might to rid Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction, and challenged the Council to back up its words with action to force President Saddam Hussein to comply.

''The United States would welcome and support a new resolution which makes clear that the Security Council stands behind its previous demands; yet resolutions mean little without resolve,'' Mr. Bush told reporters at the White House.

Anticipating an effort by Iraq to string out the inspections and to drive a wedge between members of the Security Council by appearing to cooperate, Mr. Bush made clear that he would have none of it.

''Saddam Hussein can now be expected to begin another round of empty concessions, transparently false denials,'' the president said. ''No doubt he will play a last-minute game of deception. The game is over.''

Even as the Bush administration kept open the diplomatic door, the Army's 101st Airborne, which is the military's largest air assault unit and is known as the Screaming Eagles, received orders to send more than 15,000 troops and nearly 300 combat helicopters from Fort Campbell, Ky., to the Persian Gulf, military officials said.

The decision to send the division, which has fought in America's battles from World War II to Afghanistan, underscores the importance the Pentagon is placing on fast-moving forces in a war with Iraq. It also appears to set one of the last major military pieces in place before an offensive begins to oust Mr. Hussein.

Once the 101st Division's equipment is loaded aboard ships in Jacksonville, Fla., and other East Coast ports, sailing time to the Persian Gulf is about three weeks.

The latest deployment order came as there were signs that Iraq was beginning to bend under the military and diplomatic pressure. An Iraqi scientist agreed to be interviewed in private, without a government witness. United Nations officials said it was also possible that Baghdad would soon allow U-2 surveillance flights over its territory.

A day after Mr. Powell presented evidence to the Security Council that he said showed Iraq was deceiving inspectors in its determination to conceal or obtain nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, many experts said there were signs that France was preparing for a possible shift in position.

France's only aircraft carrier, the Charles de Gaulle, sailed this week from the southern port of Toulon for exercises in the Mediterranean. French media have reported that the country's military is engaged in a hurried effort to retrofit munitions so they would be compatible with American weapons.

France's former army chief of staff, Jacques Lanxade, told a French newspaper that the nation could send as many as 12,000 troops to Iraq if it comes to war.

Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin, speaking during a trip to India, said: ''We're not systematically pacifist, but we think war isn't nice, and we don't want war. We know that it's the last resort that could be considered when all other options have been considered.''

American officials are weighing several possible formulas for a new Security Council resolution, including a text that would not explicitly call for ''all necessary means'' against Baghdad, the Council's most direct language for war.

American and British officials have also considered including a ultimatum with a very short deadline -- perhaps as little as 48 hours -- that would give Arab nations an 11th-hour chance to persuade Mr. Hussein to step down peacefully.

Consulting closely with Britain, the Bush administration would like to lay all the legal groundwork for military action by mid-March, the diplomats said. Pentagon officials have said the military would be best positioned to strike anytime after mid-February.

Administration officials, assessing the reaction to Mr. Powell's exposition, are more inclined to seek a second resolution because they believe that France and Germany, the two most active Council opponents of war, are becoming isolated in Europe and losing force among the 15 Council nations.

Mr. Powell said today that in a rapid succession of one-on-one meetings with Council foreign ministers after his speech on Wednesday, he detected ''a shift in attitude that suggested, I think, more and more nations are realizing that this cannot continue like this indefinitely.''

Speaking today before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Powell said a decision on using force would ''start to come to a head'' after Feb. 14, when the two chief United Nations weapons inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, are to report to the Council after two days of talks in Baghdad this weekend.

While Dr. ElBaradei, the chief nuclear inspector, appealed to Iraq today for a ''drastic'' change of attitude, the United States and Britain are confident that Mr. Hussein will not make any concessions large enough to satisfy Council demands for complete cooperation.

American diplomats are not yet certain that they have the nine votes necessary to adopt a resolution. But as signs of the declining support for France and Germany, United States officials pointed to an open letter released on Wednesday by 10 Eastern European nations, calling for the Council to respond to ''the clear and present danger posed by Saddam Hussein's regime'' with ''necessary and appropriate action,'' a strong endorsement of Washington's position. The letter follows a similar one from eight Western European nations last week.

Administration officials have said there are tremendous advantages to having an endorsement of military action from the Council, even if the resolution were to pass with abstentions from France, Russia and China, veto-bearing permanent members of the Council. Many nations, especially in the Arab world, have said they are ready to support the United States in war but need a Council resolution to give them cover with opponents at home.

To make a new resolution more acceptable to France and other skeptics on the Council, the United States might put forward a text that finds that Iraq has committed a ''further material breach'' of the weapons inspections, which were established in Resolution 1441, and recalls the ''serious consequences'' that the Council threatened if Iraq failed to cooperate.

The authorization of force would not be fully spelled out. The United States and Britain contend that they wrote into Resolution 1441, which was adopted unanimously, all the authority they need for military action. If American and British diplomats can build support among the 10 nonpermanent members for a resolution to use force, they are relatively sure that France will not use its veto to block the measure.

American diplomats say they believe that if Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei give a strongly negative report, it may be possible to win French support for a cautiously worded resolution. Russia and China are likely to abstain.

Mexico, a nonpermanent member, today expressed support for France's proposal. But nations whose support for the United States is becoming clearer include Spain, Bulgaria, Chile, Cameroon, Guinea and Angola. Vice President Dick Cheney spoke by telephone on Wednesday morning with José Eduardo dos Santos, the president of Angola, American diplomats said.

In Germany, Europe's staunchest opponent to war, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder reiterated that his country would not take part in any military action. But he came under attack from opposition figures who said the he had unnecessarily isolated Germany from its main ally and weakened its ability to play a role in international affairs.

The United States did little, meanwhile, to disabuse German fears of diplomatic isolation. The American ambassador to Germany, Daniel Coates, said in a television interview that the position of Germany was raising ''serious doubts'' in the United States about whether it was still a reliable ally.

In Moscow, the Kremlin said that President Vladimir V. Putin had spoken by telephone today with the French president, Jacques Chirac, and that the two had agreed that the Iraq crisis should be solved by political and diplomatic means.
