THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Powell to Charge Iraq Is Shifting Its Illegal Arms to Foil Inspectors
By Julia Preston With Steven R. Weisman
Feb. 5, 2003

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will show the United Nations evidence on Wednesday that Iraq has worked to conceal illegal arms from international inspectors, American officials said today.

Mr. Powell hopes to convince the Security Council that further action is needed to make Iraq comply with orders to eliminate weapons of mass destruction, officials said.

Mr. Powell's presentation, which is to take up to 90 minutes, will include recently intercepted communications within Iraq indicating a pattern of hiding chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programs from United Nations inspectors. Mr. Powell will also rely on reports from people inside Iraq.

''You're going to have to use your mind as well as your eyes and ears to take in the complete picture,'' a White House official said, alluding to visual materials in the presentation. The example of hard evidence invoked frequently in this case has been the photographs Adlai E. Stevenson showed at the United Nations in 1962 to prove the existence of nuclear missile sites in Cuba.

Among the evidence the administration was considering declassifying were satellite photographs showing activity at inspection target sites shortly before inspections teams arrived, an administration official said. The photographs clearly show soldiers digging holes, moving equipment or burying things, the official said. There are also shots of tractor-trailers, which American intelligence officials believe might be mobile weapons labs.

The official said that, because of concerns about revealing too much about surveillance technology, Mr. Powell might choose to show some of the evidence in private meetings with Security Council members.

''There is a clear, concerted effort by Iraq to hide component parts, weapons sites and witnesses from the inspectors,'' another official said.

While President Saddam Hussein of Iraq insisted in Baghdad today that he has no prohibited weapons, Hans Blix, one of the United Nations' chief weapons inspectors, warned Iraq that it must cooperate immediately because it is ''five minutes to midnight'' in the countdown to war.

Mr. Blix said today he has seen no evidence to date that Iraq has tried to subvert his work, although he said he has received ''reports from intelligence agencies'' making such assertions.

''We have had reports for a long time about these mobile units,'' he said. ''We have never found one. We have not seen any signs of things being moved around, whether tracks in the sand or in the ground.''

The Council awaited Mr. Powell's presentation with interest and foreboding, uncertain whether his revelations would be compelling enough to persuade reluctant nations that there was no alternative but war to disarm the Iraqi regime.

In Baghad today, the weapons inspection team said it had discovered another empty Sakr-18 chemical warhead, at the Al Taji ammunition depot north of Baghdad. The warhead was similar to one found at another depot on Jan. 16.

Mr. Blix said it was still unclear whether the empty munitions were ''the tip of the iceberg'' of chemical warheads Iraq has not accounted for, or the ''debris'' of their destruction.

The impact of Mr. Powell's presentation will determine how soon the United States will go to war to disarm Iraq, and whether it will enjoy broad international support or step outside the United Nations to lead a narrower coalition into combat.

German diplomats prepared a formally structured Council meeting to begin at 10:30 a.m. on Wednesday, in which Mr. Powell would speak and each of the other 14 Council members would have up to eight minutes to comment. Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammed Aldouri, will be allowed to give a rebuttal at the end of the session, the German ambassador, Gunter Pleuger, announced today.

Germany is organizing the session because it holds the rotating presidency of the Council this month. The coincidence compounded the tension because the meeting will be led by the German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, who clashed with Mr. Powell when they last met here on Jan. 20. Germany has said it will not send troops to any fighting in Iraq because ''the risks by far outweigh the possible benefits,'' as Mr. Pleuger said.

In intensive global diplomacy, as many as 10 Eastern European nations who were recently invited to join NATO or aspire to join will present a letter of support here tomorrow for the American campaign to disarm Iraq, diplomats said. Their letter follows a similar one from eight European countries last week.

Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia are expected to sign, as well as three NATO aspirants -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia. Their support is a sign of gratitude for Washington's efforts to help them enter NATO.

President Bush spoke today for about 15 minutes with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, a permanent, veto-bearing member of the Security Council.

The administration's efforts to round up support for using force against Iraq got a boost, meanwhile from Prince Saud al-Faisal, the Saudi Arabian foreign minister, who was quoted by Time magazine on its Web site today as saying his country would encourage France, Russia and China to back a resolution authorizing force. ''Should conflict come, we think it should be through the United Nations machinery,'' he said.

American officials have said they did not support the decision by Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, the United Nations' chief nuclear inspector, to return once more to Baghdad.

But Mr. Blix stressed said today that the meeting will be Iraq's very last chance to show that it is ready to reveal fully the status of its weapons programs. He said he wants to see clear measures by Iraq to show the Council ''that it will actively seek any items that are proscribed or give credible evidence for their absence.''

After flying to New York this afternoon, Mr. Powell met with George Tenet, the director of central intelligence, as well as Mr. Tenet's chief deputy, John McLaughlin, and other aides. They are expected to accompany him to the Security Council.

One official said Mr. Powell and the intelligence leaders met to refine the classified information they plan to release and to go over what to say about it ''to make sure the materials are well prepared.''

While preparing for the presentation on Wednesday, Mr. Powell also planned a furious round of diplomatic pressure on Security Council nations to accept the evidence as convincing enough to lead to a second resolution authorizing force in coming weeks if Iraq does not quickly cooperate in revealing its illegal weapons and permitting them to be destroyed.

The secretary met this afternoon with the Chinese foreign minister, Tang Jiaxuan.

After his presentation, Mr. Powell will meet with Security Council foreign ministers, State Department officials said.

American officials said that while they may be getting votes on the Council for a speedy resolution, France, Russia and China are crucial because only they, along with Britain and the United States, have veto power. France has been the major holdout against a quick move for a second resolution authorizing an attack on Iraq, saying that inspectors needed more time to see if they could find Iraq's weapons. That view was reiterated today by President Jacques Chirac of France after his meeting in Paris with Tony Blair, the British prime minister.

Administration officials said they were not especially worried about Mr. Chirac's reaction, since French officials say they want to see the details in Mr. Powell's presentation and signaled that their position would not change at least until then.

Mr. Powell's presentation was previewed by Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage, who told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the secretary would try to explain the basis for administration fears of an Iraqi connection with Al Qaeda. ''Our fear has been, as we've tried to explain, the nexus of his weapons, his bloody-mindedness and terrorist groups,'' Mr. Armitage said.

Mr. Hussein, in an interview in Baghdad with a British Socialist politician, Tony Benn, for British television's Channel Four news, said, ''There is only one truth, and therefore I tell you as I have said on many occasions before, that Iraq has no weapons of mass destruction.''

The interview brought a curt response from Mr. Powell, who was walking to his car at the United Nations mission.

''Prove it,'' he said.
