THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; POWELL, IN U.N. SPEECH, PRESENTS CASE TO SHOW IRAQ HAS NOT DISARMED
By Steven R. Weisman
Feb. 6, 2003

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, pressing the American case for a possible war to disarm Iraq, today presented photographs, intercepts of conversations between Iraqi military officers and information from defectors aimed at proving that Saddam Hussein poses an imminent danger to the world.

Among the evidence presented at the United Nations Security Council were recordings of Iraqis referring to ''nerve agents,'' and to apparent efforts to remove incriminating material before the arrival of United Nations inspectors. Scratchy-sounding voices in Arabic saying, ''We evacuated everything,'' ''Remove,'' and ''Forbidden ammo,'' echoed eerily in a chamber clearly tense over the possibility of war.

On two big screens, the secretary also showed satellite photographs of what he said were chemical and biological facilities, and drawings based on witnesses' descriptions of trucks and rail cars converted into mobile laboratories for lethal materials, allegedly intended to evade detection. He said various records and intelligence showed that Mr. Hussein was making nuclear weapons and developing rockets and aircraft to deliver all his weapons.

In the Bush administration's most explicit effort to connect the activities between Iraq and Al Qaeda, Mr. Powell suggested that Iraq's lethal weapons could be given at any time to terrorists who could use them against the United States or Europe.

''Leaving Saddam Hussein in possession of weapons of mass destruction for a few more months or years is not an option, not in a post-September 11th world,'' he declared. He added that Iraq had unquestionably violated United Nations resolutions, including the latest one, demanding that it cooperate with inspectors and disarm. [Transcript of the speech, Pages A18-20.]

But despite Mr. Powell's tone of urgency, it was far from clear that he had convinced his audience of the need for military action. In Europe, where polls show most citizens anxious about a war with Iraq, opinions did not seem much transformed even from those who watched the secretary on television.

In addition, envoys of France, Russia and China -- veto-bearing members of the Security Council -- all suggested that the evidence, while compelling, reinforced their view that the inspectors needed more time to do their work, and that Iraq should again be pressed to cooperate.

The next milestone in what many American officials regard as a march toward war is now generally understood to be Feb. 14, when the two chief inspectors, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, report again to the Security Council.

Administration officials said a second Security Council resolution authorizing use of force against Iraq would be desirable but not necessary. If it is clear that there are not the votes for a resolution or if any nations with a veto might use it, American officials say the United States, Britain and other like-minded nations will be ready for an attack Iraq in March without United Nations approval.

On the other hand, France has still not been ruled out as an ally, administration officials said. A senior State Department official welcomed the statement today by the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, that Iraq is known to possess chemical and biological weapons, that it had not cooperated with the inspectors and that war was possible as a ''last resort.''

Overall, the picture that emerged today in the Council -- and also on television screens across the nation and around the world -- was that an administration that for many weeks had tried and failed to persuade skeptics of the urgency of the Iraq problem was now getting a chance to lay out its indictment of Iraqi conduct. It came in the form of a nearly encyclopedic catalog that reached further than many had expected.

''My colleagues,'' Mr. Powell implored the Council members at the end of his speech, ''we have an obligation to our citizens, we have an obligation to this body to see that our resolutions are complied with.'' Iraq has been given one last chance to avoid war but has failed to seize it, he said, adding: ''We must not shrink from whatever is ahead of us. We must not fail in our duty and our responsibility for the citizens of the countries that are represented by this body.''

Part of the impact of his materials was that they seemed in some ways to evoke the U-2 photographs presented by Adlai E. Stevenson in this same chamber in 1962. That presentation coincided with the most dangerous moment of the cold war, when the United States confronted the Soviet Union over the placement of missiles in Cuba.

The purpose of the presentation today seemed to be to shake the members of the Council out of what the Bush administration regards as their complacency over the Iraqi threat. European diplomats skeptical of a war against Iraq say that Mr. Hussein can be contained by the current inspections regime and, in any case, that he does not threaten those living far away.

In the last several days, Mr. Powell held hours of meetings at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency in Langley, Va., where the director of Central Intelligence, George J. Tenet, and others went over the materials unveiled today.

The result was an extraordinary public revelation of the C.I.A.'s tools: defectors, informants, intercepts, procurement records, photographs and, unusually, comments of detainees seized in Afghanistan and elsewhere since Sept. 11. At many times, Mr. Powell said items of information from different sources corroborated one another.

For example, he said, ''we have first-hand descriptions of biological weapons factories on wheels and on rails.'' Confirmation did not come until the year 2000, he said, when ''the source was an eyewitness, an Iraqi chemical engineer who supervised one of these facilities.''

It was he, Mr. Powell said, who confirmed that the production began on Thursdays at midnight, and went on through Friday, because it was believed that United Nations inspectors would not intrude during the Muslim Sabbath on Friday.

In all, he said, the weapons inspectors clearly had been unable to find biological weapons because they were being moved constantly around the country. Other evidence, he said, was stored in homes and even in cars that were also constantly on the run to avoid inspectors.

Holding up a vial of white powder, Mr. Powell said that ''less than a teaspoon of dry anthrax, a little bit, about this amount'' was enough to shut down the United States Senate in the fall of 2001. Then with a pause, he said that ''Iraq declared 8,500 liters of anthrax,'' but that United Nations inspectors estimated that he could have produced 25,000 liters, or 22,700 dry quarts.

Mr. Powell's assertion of connections between Iraq and Al Qaeda were aimed especially at European thinking, administration officials said. Mr. Powell took care to show a map indicating the range, and potential range, of the rockets and aircraft that he said Iraq was developing for use in delivering chemical, biological and perhaps even nuclear weapons.

For skeptics in France and Germany, Mr. Powell noted that Al Qaeda operatives had been working in those countries, as well as in Britain, Spain, Italy and Russia. He based those assertions, he said, on testimony of informants and detainees, as well as the arrest of 116 Qaeda operatives. To drive home the point, he showed a chart of the group's network in Europe.

He also said ''colleagues'' of a Qaeda leader, Abu Mussab al-Zarqawi, had been identified as coming and going from Baghdad, and were active in the Pankisi Gorge in the former Soviet republic of Georgia and in Chechnya.

''Al Qaeda continues to have a deep interest in acquiring weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Powell asserted, adding that given everything that is known about Mr. Hussein in Iraq, it was not worth the risk to assume that he would never share his weapons with terrorists.

Diplomats said the most compelling information seemed to prove that Iraq had cleaned up and removed incriminating information at countless sites, in many cases just before inspectors went there.

''We saw this kind of housecleaning at close to 30 sites,'' he said. ''We don't know precisely what Iraq was moving, but the inspectors already knew about these sites, so Iraq knew that they would be coming.''
