Powell Charts Low-Key Path In Iraq Debate
By James Dao
Sept. 2, 2002


As debate over Iraq has intensified in recent weeks, one voice has been conspicuously absent amid the statements of other senior Bush administration officials: that of Secretary of State Colin L. Powell. But that silence will be tested as Secretary Powell prepares to attend an international meeting in South Africa this week.

The trip in many ways reflects Secretary Powell's role as chief internationalist in an administration frequently portrayed as unilateralist even by its allies.

Secretary Powell signaled his approach on Thursday in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation, saying that United Nations weapons inspectors should return to Iraq. Three days earlier, by contrast, Vice President Dick Cheney had bluntly stated that a return of inspectors ''would provide no assurance whatsoever,'' and had talked of ''a great danger that it would provide false comfort.''

A portion of Secretary Powell's comments, taped for a coming program about last September's terrorist attacks, was released today by the BBC. ''The president has been clear that he believes weapons inspectors should return,'' he said. ''Iraq has been in violation of these many U.N. resolutions for most of the last 11 or so years. And so as a first step, let's see what the inspectors find.''

Upon arriving in Johannesburg on Tuesday for the World Summit on Sustainable Development, a gathering on the environment and economic assistance for the third world sponsored by the United Nations, Secretary Powell will bring pledges of aid, endorse conservation programs and promote free trade and democratic rights as the keys to economic development. But Iraq will inevitably be a prominent issue as well, with Secretary Powell expected to explain the administration's plans in news conferences and private meetings with officials from African, European and Asian nations, State Department officials say.

The secretary's remarks on Iraq are sure to be carefully scrutinized by diplomats and journalists for signs of disagreement with President Bush's other principal foreign policy advisers -- Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser; Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Mr. Cheney -- who have used recent events to call forcefully for the ouster of the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein.

However, Secretary Powell's remarks to the BBC differed little from what he said as long ago as February in testimony before Congress, and White House officials said they reflected neither a shift in his views nor any widening of debate within the administration.

Speaking on Air Force One today as President Bush returned to Washington from his vacation in Texas, Scott McClellan, a White House spokesman, insisted that there was no difference of opinion or emphasis between Secretary Powell and Mr. Cheney.

Mr. McClellan also said that important as inspections were, 'unfettered inspections are not enough.''

''They still might be hiding something,'' he said. Even if Mr. Hussein allowed weapons inspectors into the country, he said, Mr. Bush's commitment to ''regime change'' would not be altered.

Secretary Powell has also often made it clear that he supports removing Mr. Hussein from power, even though he is widely thought to disagree with hawks who advocate swift, unilateral military action against Iraq.

Rather, administration officials say, the secretary believes that Mr. Bush should first press for a new round of weapons inspections and then seek international support for invasion plans. That view has recently been endorsed by three Republican foreign policy experts: former Secretaries of State James A. Baker III and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, and former national security adviser Brent Scowcroft.

But Secretary Powell has said little else in weeks, and his public restraint on Iraq in recent weeks -- part of which time he spent on vacation -- has been viewed in some quarters as evidence that he is trying to distance himself from the more bellicose statements of his administration colleagues.

''He seems not to be prevailing with regard to the multilateral approach to resolving the Iraq problem,'' said Lee H. Hamilton, a former Democratic congressman who is now director of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.

''He remains an important voice in the administration, but that is not to say he is the most important voice,'' Mr. Hamilton continued. ''It's difficult to see how the Bush administration, or Bush himself, can backtrack from Cheney's very strong, aggressive stance.''

In two speeches last week, Mr. Cheney presented the most detailed argument yet by the Bush administration for attacking Iraq, arguing that Mr. Hussein could acquire nuclear weapons ''fairly soon'' and that weapons inspections had proven ineffective to slow those programs.

State Department officials asserted that Secretary Powell's public silence on Iraq should not be construed as evidence of either disagreement or disengagement. He agrees that Mr. Hussein is dangerous, they note, and presses his views on how best to deal with that problem in daily conversations with President Bush.

''He's on the phone all the time with people here, as well as with foreign ministers,'' Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said last week. ''He has made clear in those conversations, as he has throughout the administration, throughout the summer, that Iraq is a danger we have to deal with.''

Secretary Powell's friends and advisers offer another explanation for his silence: he has concluded that he can be more effective through quiet diplomacy than public demonstrations of disagreement.

''I think it important that Secretary Powell continues to maintain the high ground in his efforts and interfaces with the president in a way he feels is most appropriate,'' said Senator Chuck Hagel, a Republican from Nebraska who has urged the administration to build international support for its Iraq policies. ''Sometimes that means saying fewer things in public.''

At the meeting in Johannesburg, Secretary Powell will discuss American aid for programs to conserve rain forests in the Congo River basin, expand clean water supplies and sanitation facilities, and stem famine in southern Africa.

In private meetings with African leaders, he is also expected to discuss Zimbabwe, where food shortages are particularly severe. The Bush administration asserts that President Robert Mugabe's economic and land redistribution policies are partly responsible for the spreading hunger.

After a day in Johannesburg, Secretary Powell will spend half a day in Angola where he will talk with President José Eduardo dos Santos about the nation's efforts to rebuild after three decades of civil war. From there, he will visit Gabon to attend a round table on conserving forest land and to meet with President El Hadj Omar Bongo.

Secretary Powell will also meet privately with nearly a dozen foreign leaders, including Prime Minister Mikhail M. Kasyanov of Russia, Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi of Japan and United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan.

The United States has come under sharp criticism at the summit meeting for opposing timetables for reducing its dependence on fossil fuels, easing hunger and eliminating subsidies for its farmers.

Those critics have accused Mr. Bush of trying to undermine the summit meeting by not attending even though heads of states from nearly 100 other countries are scheduled to take part, including Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany. Mr. Bush, the critics assert, acquiesced to conservative strategists like Paul Weyrich, Grover Norquist and David A. Keene who had urged him to stay away from Johannesburg.

Asked about such criticism last week, Mr. Boucher said, ''I think the president's commitment is quite clear.'' He added, ''The United States is a very strong and active member of the conference.''

Robert C. Orr, Washington director of the Council on Foreign Relations, said whether or not Mr. Bush was interested in Africa, renewable energy, AIDS or global poverty, Secretary Powell was keenly concerned about those issues.

But the secretary will be spending only two days in Africa, giving him little time to address such complex problems in depth. For that reason, Mr. Orr said, the administration's principal goal for the trip may be to dispel perceptions that the United States is arrogant and unilateralist in its foreign policies -- perceptions that could hurt efforts to build an international coalition against Iraq.

''Their top agenda item is to get out of there without trouble,'' Mr. Orr said. ''This is not a time when the U.S. wants to look like it's shirking international responsibilities.''
