Ideas & Trends: After Saddam; Now What?
By Todd S. Purdum
Feb. 17, 2002


FOR better or worse, a bipartisan consensus has emerged in the Bush administration and Congress alike that the United States can no longer tolerate an Iraqi regime led by Saddam Hussein. Former Vice President Al Gore, for example, told the Council on Foreign Relations last week, ''Failure cannot be an option, which means that we must be prepared to go the limit.''

But how and when to replace Saddam Hussein -- and with whom -- remains a matter of deeply unsettled debate. So does an even larger question: How would Washington define victory in Iraq and the surrounding region if and when it dislodges the brutal dictator with a taste for weapons of mass destruction?

''The easy part is going to be, in a bizarre sense, taking Saddam out,'' said Senator Joseph R. Biden, Democrat of Delaware and chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee. ''The hard part is what do you do after that.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, long seen as the voice of caution on Iraq, outlined the most hopeful outcome for the Senate Budget Committee last week: ''We still believe strongly in regime change in Iraq,'' he said, ''and we look forward to the day when a democratic, representative government at peace with its neighbors leads Iraq to rejoin the family of nations.''

But that is no small goal for an administration that has expressed disdain for ''nation building'' and that, despite its swift military success in Afghanistan, is already hard-pressed to assure long-term stability there. Iraq may well require something more like region-building, and the practical possibilities are not necessarily encouraging, despite polls that show widespread support among the American public for getting rid of Mr. Hussein.

Would a post-Hussein Iraq disintegrate into an incipient Kurdish state in the north, inflaming Kurdish nationalism in neighboring Turkey and Iran? Would Iran move to exert influence among the Shiite Muslims in the south? Could the rag-tag Iraqi National Congress opposition group in London plant the seeds for democracy? Or would another general from Mr. Hussein's Baath Party stage an officer-led coup, perhaps with American military backup and air cover, as some believe the C.I.A. might yet like?

''It would be a tragedy if Saddam is removed only to be replaced by another tyrant,'' said Richard Perle, an assistant secretary of defense in the Reagan administration who is now a vocal advocate of action against Mr. Hussein. Yet, Mr. Perle argues that fretting about future instability in Iraq amounts to defending the status quo.

''There's nothing stable about Iraq now,'' he said. ''Iraq under Saddam has been a source of war and instability for 20 years. They've invaded Iran, they've invaded Kuwait, they've paid suicide bombers in the West Bank.'' Still, he acknowledged, ''It's hard to separate a post-Saddam regime from different views about how to go about replacing him, and there are people who think the most promising route is a coup d'état and that almost certainly delivers Iraq into the hands of whomever does it.''

The first President Bush stopped the Persian Gulf war short of invading Baghdad 11 years ago for several reasons, not least among them uncertainty about who would succeed Mr. Hussein. The consensus then was that Mr. Hussein would collapse of his own weight. In fact, he is now as firmly entrenched as ever.

Leon Fuerth, who was Mr. Gore's national security adviser in the White House, recently debated Mr. Perle at the Council on Foreign Relations, and argued that the United States should ''get rid of Saddam Hussein, but we need to get rid of him at a time that we have prepared, under conditions that we have set in motion.''

In an interview, Mr. Fuerth, now a visiting professor at George Washington University, agreed with Mr. Perle on at least one point: ''Who's going to run this country?'' he said. ''Is it going to be run by the next-nastiest person in line after Saddam Hussein? Success would be not a military dictatorship but an honest-to-God democracy in a state that is federalized, so it provides the means to accommodate the three major groups, Kurds, Sunnis and Shiites.''

The American interest in such an outcome is, in fact, much broader than whether Iraqis are ruled well. If the country can be held together, it is more likely to remain a bulwark against an expansion of Iranian power. And a unified Iraq in which Kurds felt well treated would also calm the fears of Turkey -- a vital Western ally -- that its own Kurds could secede.

In the largest sense, too, the shape of a postwar Iraq could define whether Americans had scored a lasting victory or had merely replaced one problem with another, perhaps smaller, one. Certainly the continued prosecution of a global war on terror would not be helped if the outcome were prolonged instability or civil war in such a large country, with so much oil, in the heart of the Arab world.

Mr. Fuerth parts company with Mr. Perle on whether the London-based Iraqi National Congress is anywhere near up to the job of holding together a stable, well-ruled Iraq once Mr. Hussein is removed.

Last month, the administration restored its financing for the group, led by Ahmed Chalabi, after cutting the funds over accounting disputes. The group was involved in the 1990's in an abortive C.I.A. attempt to build an alliance in northern Iraq to challenge Mr. Hussein's rule, but the recriminations over the failure of that effort have left bitter feelings on both sides, and officials in the administration and Congress have questions about the group's capacity.

Some Republicans, too, have warned that the United States must proceed carefully in considering a military strike on Iraq. ''What happens after it's all over?'' Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska asked on CNN. ''What is the outcome? Do you, in fact, destroy Iraq to the point where you break it up, and you make it even more dangerous?''

ALLIES from Western Europe to the Persian Gulf have made no secret of their qualms about American military action against Iraq. Not least among them is Saudi Arabia, which was a crucial ally in the Persian Gulf war a decade ago. ''I think any change in Iraq, with the Iraqi regime and the toppling of Saddam Hussein, must come from inside Iraq,'' Prince Turki al-Faisal, Saudi Arabia's former intelligence chief, said in a rare interview on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' two weeks ago. ''If you send invasion forces from outside, you will only rally people to Saddam Hussein, particularly in Iraq.''

The prince left a more direct fear unstated: that a change in regime could leave Iraq's Shiite minority more empowered, and with its natural affinity for Iran, that could spell trouble for the Saudis.

Mr. Gore's longtime adviser, Mr. Fuerth, pointed up a potentially broader problem for an administration that has so far steadfastly resisted committing United States ground forces to help keep the peace in Afghanistan, let alone in a future Iraqi regime.

''The problem with the administration is that it wants to hand it off to somebody once the fighting is done and scram,'' he said. In fact, that approach has already proved problematic in Afghanistan, where the rivalries of local warlords are being carefully watched by its neighbors. Even with an equally clear military victory in Iraq, an indecisive political outcome could leave Iraq's powerful neighbors jockeying to fill a power vacuum with their own proxies.

Mr. Bush and his hawkish and dovish advisers alike have insisted that all options are on the table for replacing the 64-year-old Mr. Hussein and that no final decisions have been made.

''He could leave it many different ways, from natural causes through other causes, but I don't want to get specific as to what options,'' Mr. Powell told senators last week. ''He is exactly the same age I am, and I am constantly looking at the actuary tables.''

When Senator Kent Conrad, Democrat of North Dakota, replied, ''You look pretty healthy, Mr. Secretary,'' Mr. Powell answered simply: ''I believe I'm healthier than he is. I hope I am, anyway.''
