THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Powell Calls for U.N. to Act on Iraq and Meets Deep Resistance
By Julia Preston
Feb. 15, 2003

The chief United Nations weapons inspectors today reported some progress in Iraq, and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell faced deep resistance to his call for a Security Council decision to authorize military force.

The clash was frontal and impassioned as Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin of France spurned Mr. Powell's arguments, saying that the inspections had not failed and that there was no cause for armed action yet.

He proposed holding a new meeting of Security Council foreign ministers on March 14 to take stock of Iraq's cooperation.

Drawing a rare burst of applause from the audience in the Council chambers, Mr. de Villepin told Mr. Powell: ''In this temple of the United Nations, we are the guardians of an ideal, the guardians of conscience. This onerous responsibility and immense honor we have must lead us to give priority to disarmament through peace.''

Mr. Powell set aside his prepared remarks, speaking spontaneously and throwing his personal prestige behind his assertion that Iraq had failed decisively to comply with Council's demand that it disarm.

''We cannot allow this process to be endlessly strung out as Iraq is trying to do right now,'' Mr. Powell said. ''My friends, they cannot be allowed to get away with it again,'' he added, referring to Iraq's effort to hide illegal weapons.

For some time, the Bush administration has been saying a decision on whether to go to war must come within weeks. Whether it would be prepared to wait until March 14, another four weeks, was unclear today.

Both the chief arms inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, cited measures Iraq had taken to allow surveillance flights, provide new documents and open investigations of past arms stocks as indications that its cooperation had improved, even if it fell short of being unconditional.

Mr. de Villepin proposed extending and strengthening arms inspections, and Russia and China -- both permanent Council members with veto power -- rallied behind the proposal, as did Germany and many other nonpermanent members.

Faced with the unexpectedly resolute opposition, Mr. Powell stopped short of detailing a course of action the United States would seek from the Council.

Early in the day, American and British diplomats said they expected to introduce by the middle of next week a draft resolution to lay the final legal groundwork for war. But Mr. Powell left the United Nations today saying only that he would consult with President Bush and others in Washington and decide ''in the not too distant future'' how to proceed.

A senior French official said after the meeting that France would not support any resolution that Washington offered next week. He did not say whether France would use its veto.

American officials seemed surprised by the depth of the opposition on the Council to immediate military action. Even countries like Chile and Angola, whose support Washington believed to be locked in, said the more positive report by the chief inspectors made it premature to turn to force.

But an angry rift among European nations was on display, as Spain and Bulgaria disagreed with France and its supporters. Foreign Minister Ana Palacio of Spain rejected Mr. de Villepin's proposals for extending the inspections, saying, ''We would be sending a message of weakness'' and adding, ''therefore this Council would lose its credibility.''

Mr. Blix adopted a strikingly different and more positive tone about Iraq's cooperation with his work than he did in his last report, on Jan. 27. At no point did he specifically criticize any Iraqi failure to cooperate, sticking to a cool and technical assessment of the events.

Mr. Blix, the chief biological and chemical weapons inspector, accepted little of the evidence that Mr. Powell presented to the Council on Feb. 5 as proof that Iraq was working to deceive the inspectors and conceal weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Blix took issue with one of Mr. Powell's points, about trucks that American intelligence analysts had identified as working on chemical decontamination at a munitions depot. The arms chief said satellite images Mr. Powell showed of the trucks had been taken two weeks apart, so the movements of munitions they showed ''could just as easily have been a routine activity.''

Mr. Blix also rejected American assertions that Iraqi officials had obtained advance information on which sites inspectors would examine. ''In no case have we seen convincing evidence that the Iraqi side knew in advance that we were coming,'' he said.

As a concession to the inspectors, Iraq adopted a law today -- hours before the Council convened -- banning all weapons of mass destruction. The law fulfilled an obligation imposed in a 1991 Council resolution. And both Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei, the chief nuclear inspector, said they were satisfied with terms Iraq laid down for overflights by U-2, Mirage and Antonov surveillance aircraft and German pilotless drone aircraft.

Iraq also appointed two commissions to search for evidence of the elimination of weapons it was known to have in the past.

But Mr. Blix by no means presented a picture of vigorous disarmament by Baghdad. He confirmed one clear-cut case of a violation with a current weapon, reporting that the Samoud 2 ballistic missiles that Baghdad has been testing exceed the legal range limit of 90 miles.

He noted that Iraq had constructed special chambers for casting Badr 2000 missiles that the inspectors determined to be illegal. United Nations inspectors had destroyed the chambers before leaving Iraq in 1998, and Iraqi weapons experts rebuilt them.

Mr. Blix said his team was still having difficulties interviewing Iraqi weapons experts in private. He said new documents Iraq provided during his two-day trip to Baghdad last weekend had provided no new evidence concerning Iraq's past anthrax and chemical weapons programs. But he said the papers ''could be indicative of a more active attitude'' by Iraq to resolve open questions.

The only strong phrase that Mr. Blix gave to support Mr. Powell was his last, when he said the period of disarmament of Iraq ''could still be short'' if full cooperation ''were to be forthcoming.''

Dr. ElBaradei was even more upbeat, saying his inspectors have found no evidence of nuclear activity so far.

''It is my hope that the commitments made recently by Baghdad will continue to translate into concrete and sustained action,'' he said.

After the chief inspectors' reports, the session turned into an unusually free-flowing and highly charged debate before the eyes of the world. The confrontation became so raw that several smaller nations berated the Council powers for feuding and tried to point to avenues for compromise.

Because all nations agreed it was important to keep up the military pressure, some countries hinted that they might support a deadline that would give Mr. Hussein a short period to make a breakthrough in disclosing his hidden weapons.

But compromise seemed elusive. The Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, drew the chamber's second round of applause when he noted that it was Valentine's Day and called for the Council to ''get engaged'' to continue to seek a peaceful settlement.

The German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, who was chairman of the meeting as the Council president for this month, scolded the audience, noting that applause was not allowed during its sessions.

In an emotional moment, Mr. de Villepin addressed the public in Europe and the United States.

''To those who are wondering in anguish when and how we are going to cede to war, I would like to tell them that nothing, at any time, in this Security Council, will be done in haste, misunderstanding, suspicion or fear,'' he said.

But the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, said it was time for the Council to increase pressure on Iraq by taking a step closer to war. Summoning the Council to ''hold our nerve in the face of this tyrant,'' he said it had to leave no doubt that it was ready to go to war to enforce its will on Mr. Hussein.

Nations that are not Council members will meet here on Feb. 18 to give their views. Mr. Powell said he expected a new report from the weapons inspectors on March 1.
