THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; IRAQ TELLS THE U.N. ARMS INSPECTIONS WILL BE PERMITTED
By Julia Preston
Nov. 14, 2002


Iraq said very reluctantly today that it would allow United Nations weapons inspectors to begin work in the country and would ''deal with'' a Security Council resolution obligating it to disarm.

In their nine-page letter, however, the Iraqis seethed with hostility toward the United States, and repeatedly denied President Bush's assertions that they have weapons of mass destruction, setting the stage for further confrontation between Washington and Baghdad. [Text, Page A20.]

In Washington, Mr. Bush had no specific reaction to the Iraqi letter but stressed again that ''there's no negotiations with Saddam Hussein.''

''We will not tolerate any deception, denial or deceit, period,'' Mr. Bush said during a meeting with his cabinet. [Page A21.]

The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, struck a markedly different tone, urging patience on the White House before it begins any military action if Iraq balks at the rigorous weapons inspections approved on Friday with a 15-to-0 vote in the Security Council.

Even right after that vote, it was clear from speeches by delegates here that some Council members would view war as justified only if Iraq flagrantly violated the new inspections regime. There appears to be a growing gap between those nations and the Bush administration.

Administration officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, indicated that they were content for now to wait until Dec. 8 -- the deadline for Iraq to submit a complete list of its weapons programs -- before making an issue of violations.

''There's no use being taunted into an argument now over what he's got,'' a senior official said, referring to Mr. Hussein. ''There will be time for that next month.''

Once that list is submitted, it will be up to Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations weapons inspectors, to check it. Administration officials have said that only then will they pass the most sensitive American intelligence on Iraq's weapons programs to Mr. Blix.

Forgoing diplomatic niceties, the letter raged against the Americans and the British, co-authors of last Friday's resolution, calling them the ''gang of evil'' and accusing them of ''the biggest and most wicked slander'' against Iraq.

The United Nations, the letter said, ''has now been transformed into a kitchen house for big power bargaining, providing cover for war, destruction, blockades and starvation to be inflicted upon peoples.''

The letter to Mr. Annan was signed by Foreign Minister Naji Sabri of Iraq, but Council diplomats said it had the tone of Mr. Hussein.

Today, most Security Council nations welcomed Iraq's begrudging assent, calling it adequate to meet a requirement in Friday's resolution, which gave Baghdad seven days to agree to its terms.

Mr. Annan, who met today in Washington with Mr. Bush and other senior administration officials, said he was satisfied that Iraq had provided the necessary agreement. The letter arrived two days before the Friday deadline.

''What is important is that they have said yes,'' Mr. Annan said here late this afternoon after returning from Washington.

The letter said, in an English translation provided by Iraq, ''We hereby inform you that we will deal with Resolution 1441, despite its bad contents.'' It added, ''We are prepared to receive the inspectors, so they can carry out their duties, and make sure that Iraq had not developed weapons of mass destruction, during their absence since 1998.''

United Nations inspectors withdrew from Iraq in December 1998, on the eve of bombing by the United States and Britain in punishment for Baghdad's failure to cooperate with the inspectors.

No passage in the letter said plainly that Iraq would give unconditional cooperation for the inspections. Instead, it said Iraqi officials would be watching to see if the inspectors ''perform their duties in compliance with international law.

''If they do so, professionally and lawfully, without any premeditated intentions,'' it said, ''the liars' lies will be exposed to public opinion, and the declared objective of the Security Council will be achieved.''

By Dec. 8, Baghdad must present a complete declaration of all of its prohibited weapons programs. Any omissions or false statements could be the basis for ''serious consequences,'' possibly a military attack, according to the resolution.

In its letter, Iraq repeatedly dismissed as lies the Bush administration's accusations that it has used the hiatus since the last weapons inspections to make biological and chemical arms and to work on a nuclear weapon. ''Such fabrications are baseless,'' the letter said.

The letter arrived here only one day after the Iraqi Parliament recommended unanimously that Mr. Hussein reject the resolution, but left the decision in his hands.

Several Security Council diplomats dismissed the abrasive language in the letter as intended for the domestic audience in Iraq, allowing Mr. Hussein to say that in order to avert war, he had been forced to agree to the resolution, but had not bowed to the United States.

''The important thing in this is trying to spare our people from any harm,'' the letter said.

Mr. Blix confirmed today that his chemical and biological weapons team, -- together with the inspectors for the nuclear program -- would arrive in Baghdad on Nov. 18.

Just as Iraq said it was waiting to see how the inspectors would perform, Mr. Annan said the United Nations wanted to see how Iraq would cooperate.

''I think the issue is not their acceptance, but performance on the ground,'' he said in Washington. ''So let the inspectors go in, and I urge the Iraqis to cooperate with them and to perform, and I think that is the real test we are all waiting for.''

He said he did not want to jump to conclusions about the belligerent tone of Iraq's message.

''I will wait to see whether it is an indication that they are going to play games, or it is a message they are sending to their own people,'' said Mr. Annan, a veteran of many skirmishes over the inspections between the United Nations and Baghdad.

While the United States had no official reaction to today's letter, the other four permanent, veto-bearing Council nations accepted it.

''Iraq has now taken the first step,'' said the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw. ''I welcome that.''

But he added: ''We must remain vigilant. Iraq's intentions are notoriously changeable.'' He said it was only the threat from Washington and London of all-out war to disarm Iraq that had brought it to accept the Security Council's will.

The French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, also guarded, said France ''took note of Iraq's acceptance,'' and insisted that Paris wanted to see Iraq cooperate fully with the inspections.

Russia, which was the least enthusiastic among the Council powers about the threats of force in Friday's resolution, was the most enthusiastic about Iraq's response.

''We were sure Iraq would comply, as the decision is opening the way for the situation in Iraq to be settled politically,'' Foreign Minister Igor S. Ivanov told a Russian television station today.

The deputy representative from China, Zhang Yishan, announced in the Council this morning that ''Iraq has decided to accept'' resolution 1441 and ''welcomes inspectors to come back.'' China is a permanent member that holds the rotating presidency of the Council for November.

Arab nations embraced Baghdad's decision with relief, pleased that Mr. Hussein had not provoked a crisis just days after they hailed Resolution 1441 as his last chance to avoid war with the United States.

In the letter, Baghdad parroted -- but reversed -- the words Mr. Bush used in a speech to the General Assembly on Sept. 12, when he summoned the United Nations to confront Iraq or become irrelevant.

Berating the Council nations that supported the American-British resolution, the letter said, ''We fear that the United Nations organization may lose the trust and attachment of peoples, that is if it has not fallen to that place already.
ADVERTISEMENT
''He who remains silent in the defense of truth is a dumb devil,'' the letter says, referring to the 15 nations on the Security Council.

Iraq's ambassador, Mohammed A. Aldouri, adopted a somewhat milder tone here this morning, saying Iraq was ''eager'' to see the inspectors work ''in accordance with international law, as soon as possible.''
