THREATS AND RESPONSES: WHITE HOUSE; BUSH SAYS IRAQIS ARE STILL RESISTING DEMAND TO DISARM
By Richard W. Stevenson and James Dao
Jan. 22, 2003

President Bush said today that Iraq was not complying with demands that it disarm and expressed frustration at calls from France and other nations to allow more time for diplomacy and United Nations weapons inspections.

Mr. Bush's comments were part of a coordinated effort by the administration to make a case to both domestic and international audiences that Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, must go, even if achieving that goal requires sending in troops. The effort involved speeches by senior administration officials, the release today of a document outlining what the White House said was a pattern of lying and deceit by Mr. Hussein and the establishment of a new White House office to promote its message abroad.

The document made no new charges about Iraq's possession of weapons of mass destruction and provided skeptical allies with no new evidence or intelligence to overcome their opposition to military action.

France, Germany and other nations, which have counseled against a rush to military action, continued to resist. The diplomatic roadblocks threatened to complicate administration efforts to reach decisions in the next several weeks about whether to launch an invasion, and if so, whether to seek explicit backing from the United Nations Security Council. The French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, said today in Belgium, ''We see no justification today for an intervention, since the inspectors are able to do their work.''

Even before France warned on Monday that it would not support any Security Council resolution for military action against Iraq in the coming weeks, the United States faced complicated issues of timing, with some nations and the weapons inspectors themselves seeking more time to search for chemical and biological weapons and evidence of a nuclear weapons program. Inspectors have found no smoking guns, nor has the Bush administration successfully pointed them to any.

The military buildup in the Persian Gulf is scheduled to reach a level by mid- to late February that would allow military commanders to invade using their preferred battle plan. By midspring any attack could be slowed by the hot desert weather.

Using some of its toughest language to date, the administration signaled today that its decisions would be relatively speedy.

Likening Saddam Hussein's maneuvering to ''a rerun of a bad movie,'' the president warned again that time was running out for Iraq to disarm and suggested that international opposition would not deter the administration if it decided that an invasion was necessary.

Mr. Bush indicated that he had not yet made a decision on military action, telling reporters, ''I will let you know when the moment has come.''

He signaled that for now he would continue pressing nations that are expressing doubts about military action, noting that the United States had overcome the expectation last fall that it would be unable to win a unanimous Security Council vote on Iraqi disarmament.

''It's clear to me now that he is not disarming,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Hussein. ''And surely our friends have learned lessons from the past. Surely we have learned how this man deceives and delays. He's giving people the runaround.''

The American diplomatic and public relations effort is expected to build through next week, when the weapons inspectors report to the Security Council on Monday, Mr. Bush delivers his State of the Union address on Tuesday and the Security Council convenes on Wednesday to review the inspectors' report.

The 32-page document released today, titled ''Apparatus of Lies,'' purports to document the elaborate ways in which Mr. Hussein has deceived his people, world leaders and Western journalists -- all in the name of enriching himself, building his arsenal of weapons of mass destruction and oppressing Iraqis.

The administration dispatched Richard L. Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, to make a speech here today in which he dismissed as ''very dangerous wishful thinking'' the hope that Mr. Hussein would voluntarily give up any chemical or biological weapons he has or abandon efforts to develop nuclear weapons. Rebuffing the notion that an aggressive weapons inspection program or diplomacy could keep Mr. Hussein in check, Mr. Armitage said it was ''ludicrous'' to think Mr. Hussein would remain ''in his box.''

Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary, will use a speech in New York on Thursday to define the administration's expectations for how Iraq should disarm, administration officials said. On Monday, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the nonmilitary options toward Iraq had been all but exhausted.

But rallying support for military action has clearly been complicated by France's stance, which has been backed to varying degrees by Germany, Russia and China, among other nations.

The administration has not made a decision on whether to seek a formal new resolution backing military action from the Security Council, an American official said today.

Mr. Bush has promised to consult with the other Security Council members. But he has left open the option of leading a ''coalition of the willing,'' as he put it again today, to depose Mr. Hussein without Security Council authorization beyond that contained in Resolution 1441, which was adopted unanimously last fall. It warns of ''serious consequences'' for Iraq if it fails to disarm.

Administration officials said the timetable was still to press for a decision from the Council in a matter of weeks rather than months, on the ground that Mr. Hussein's defiance of the demand for cooperation was already obvious. The French may disagree, one official said, but their argument that the inspections are working to disarm Iraq ''won't stand up to scrutiny.''

But several of the nations most skeptical about the need for war showed no signs of backing down.

The German chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, told a political rally in Germany, ''Don't expect Germany to approve a resolution legitimizing war; don't expect it.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell met in Washington today with his Italian counterpart, Franco Frattini. Afterward, Mr. Frattini said his country would support the United States ''in the unfortunate event of a war,'' but he added that ''this will be done within the U.N. framework.''

Mr. de Villepin of France said the European countries on the Security Council were seeking a common position. ''It's important that Europe can express itself about such an important conflict with a single voice,'' he added. ''We are mobilized. We want to believe that war can be avoided.''

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, the closest ally of the United States in confronting Iraq, said the international pressure on Baghdad was already having an effect on Mr. Hussein's government. ''They are rattled, they are weakening,'' Mr. Blair told the House of Commons.

To help get its message out around the world, the White House formally announced today that Mr. Bush had established an Office of Global Communications to guide United States government agencies in how to ''disseminate truthful, accurate and effective messages about the American people and their government'' to audiences around the world.

But the administration continued to face arguments that confronting Iraq was a less pressing matter of national security than pursuing the campaign against terrorism and that in any case an aggressive inspections program would keep Mr. Hussein from using any weapons he has or might develop.

Mr. Bush showed no sign that the criticism had changed his thinking. Speaking to reporters in the Roosevelt Room, the president said Mr. Hussein had been given ''ample time'' to disarm but instead had chosen to ''play hide and seek.''

''You know, how much time do we need to see clearly that he's not disarming?'' Mr. Bush said with evident frustration. ''As I said, this looks like a rerun of a bad movie and I'm not interested in watching it.''

His spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said Mr. Bush would continue working to ''put spine into the United Nations and the rest of the international community'' in enforcing the resolutions. Should the United Nations fail to back up its original resolutions demanding Iraq's disarmament, Mr. Fleischer said, the organization would risk becoming irrelevant in the same way the League of Nations did between the two world wars.
