THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE TROOPS; War Imminent as Hussein Rejects Ultimatum
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 19, 2003

Artillery fire echoed through the Iraqi border region tonight and Iran's state television showed video of explosions from airstrikes in and around the Iraqi port of Basra, as the United States and Britain made final preparations to wage a war intended to topple Saddam Hussein's government in Baghdad.

Following President Bush's 48-hour ultimatum to Mr. Hussein, United States Army and Marine divisions rolled toward the Iraqi frontier today. They formed a broad arc of thousands of vehicles, shoulder to shoulder in a sprawling phalanx facing north and visible to journalists scouting the area.

Across 5,000 square miles of Kuwaiti desert, a full March moon tonight illuminated an army of 130,000 American and British soldiers arrayed with a host of M1A1 Abrams tanks, armored vehicles of every description, ubiquitous Humvees and humble troop transports, many of them short of equipment spares and tires as quartermasters scrambled to catch up.

In the front of the formations, engineering battalions wheeled their bulldozers and heavy equipment into position to breach the ditches and earthen berms that lay between the army and the Iraqi desert.

The sky over northern Kuwait was so thick with assault and transport helicopters that meteorologists trying to track an advancing sandstorm were forbidden to launch their weather balloons. Hundreds of helicopter pilots engaged in last-minute training exercises to master blind descents through the clouds of sand kicked up by their rotors.

Less visibly, military officials said American Special Operations forces had deployed from their bases on secret missions into Iraq, signaling that the invasion was imminent.

Out in the Persian Gulf, the commander of American and British naval forces, Rear Adm. John M. Kelly, expressed concern that Iraq was preparing attacks on coalition warships.

On Monday night, Iraqi Army troops dispatched a large number of fishing vessels from coastal ports and moorings and sent them into waters where aircraft carriers, destroyers and submarines were standing by to launch aircraft and cruise missiles against targets in Iraq. Military intelligence monitoring also detected the preparation of missile launching sites that could be directed at naval targets, he said.

Admiral Kelly said, ''Our concern now'' was that the Iraqi leaders ''may be more inclined to act'' against allied warships. Speaking aboard the carrier Abraham Lincoln, he added, ''The game could begin at any time.''

Elsewhere on land, there were signs of supply shortages and bottlenecks. ''I am not bringing my company into the desert without spare tires for every Humvee, because I know we are going to have flats,'' one exasperated Army major said. He worried himself through the day over the ''breakdown issue'' that he said was looming because of shortages of equipment needed to support the Army on its 300-mile trek to Baghdad.

At the 101st Airborne encampment, armed guards were stationed to prevent pilfering from trucks loaded with drinking water supplies. Hundreds of soldiers were still lining up at Army V Corps headquarters, trying to get last-minute anthrax and smallpox vaccinations.

C-130 aircraft packed with radio transmitters flew lazy circles over the Persian Gulf broadcasting messages in Arabic to the Iraqi people that were monitored by reporters near the border.

''We are fighting for a just cause to liberate a persecuted people, and to guarantee the American people's security,'' the broadcast said. ''The soldiers of the United States will carry out their mission with honor and bravery.''

In a reference apparently intended to assure Shiite Muslims who predominate in southern Iraq, the American broadcast said, ''Every segment of the Iraqi population will be represented in the government'' that Washington would help to form as an eventual successor to the 23-year rule of Mr. Hussein.

During the day, the commander of the Army forces, Lt. Gen. William S. Wallace, hopscotched by helicopter among his units and told his soldiers that ''the clock is ticking'' after President Bush's ultimatum to Saddam Hussein on Monday night.

''I don't think anyone expects him to comply with that ultimatum, which means we're on a short timeline to get ready,'' he said.

After a lightning tour of his forces in the region, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the overall United States commander, returned to his headquarters in Qatar tonight. His spokesman, Jim Wilkinson, said General Franks had wanted to take one last ''gut check'' of his subordinates before combat operations began. On Wednesday, he will fly to Prince Sultan Air Base in Saudi Arabia to meet with the top Air Force commander, Lt. Gen. Michael Moseley.

''General Franks has chosen to spend his time huddling quietly with his commanders and senior military planners to make sure plans are in place should the president give orders to act,'' Mr. Wilkinson said.

But while the commanders huddled, the grunts, who have spent weeks working in hot and harsh desert conditions, packed gear, covered latrines, lined up for final telephone calls home and wondered whether their campaign would begin in a fog of swirling sand raised by the heavy winds that were predicted for the next two days.

''This is not going to be pretty,'' one soldier said ruefully.

Aside from threatening weather, many soldiers worried about more basic protections today. In one Army unit, they were laying sandbags into their Humvees to reinforce the flimsy canvas doors that expose passengers to hostile fire.

One Army captain had his company put boxes filled with food rations on the floor of their trucks as an extra barrier against land-mine blasts.

Much of the artillery bursts that thundered through the region today rose from the Udairi range about 15 miles south of the Iraqi border, where the 101st Airborne was firing live rounds to calibrate 105-millimeter howitzers. But observers on the border reported that artillery fire could also be heard across the border.

After sundown, British and American marines assigned to split off from the main Army to take Basra in the opening days of the campaign were paying special attention to reports from Basra.

An Iranian television correspondent, standing on the Iranian side of the Shatt-al-Arab waterway that forms Basra's eastern boundary, said he could hear aircraft over the city as well as the sound of air raid sirens and explosions.

Aboard the carrier Abraham Lincoln today, the mood had shifted perceptibly as sailors and airmen were instructed to make final preparations for bombing missions. Expressions were stern and conversations more serious.

''All the machismo, all the talk about what the future will bring, well, reality is here,'' said Capt. Scott Swift, deputy commander of the carrier's air wing.

''They don't know what it is going to be like, and they don't know if they are going to be able to handle it,'' he said, pointing out that many of his pilots were flying into combat for the first time. His job, he said, was to ''reassure them that the training will kick in'' and overcome their anxieties.

On land, many Army commanders expect little resistance across the Iraq-Kuwait border, followed by an increasingly fierce defense as American-led forces approach Baghdad, which is surrounded by well-trained Republican Guard divisions most loyal to Mr. Hussein.

General Wallace, however, said he expected ''serious opposition'' as his forces plow north. Another officer with the Third Infantry Division said Iraq had three second-tier divisions in the south: the 51st Mechanized Division around Basra, the Sixth Armored Division north of Basra and the 11th Infantry Division near An-Nassiriyah.

Those divisions have dug formidable defensive obstacles that include revetments and trenches filled with oil that, when set on fire, would form an obscuring and choking screen of smoke, the officer said. He also said there was some evidence that Iraqi engineers might destroy the dam on the Euphrates River outside Kerbala, flooding and narrowing the approaches to Baghdad.

''We have no business underestimating this enemy,'' General Wallace told his troops. In an interview after his speech, he said the use of chemical weapons was still the greatest unknown about the coming battle.

''I'd be fooling you if I said I wasn't concerned,'' he said. ''Is it going to slow us down? Yeah. Is it going to stop us? No.''
