Word for Word/Inside Iraq; Beheadings, Amputations, Reprisals: Saddam Hussein's Paper Trail
By Tom Kuntz
Oct. 27, 2002


HITLER left one. So did Stalin. Modern tyrannies always leave paper trails, as startling for their dry bureaucratic detail as for their testament to rule by oppressive control, fear and cruelty.

Fresh support for this observation continues to emerge from the Iraq Research and Documentation Project at Harvard University. Since the mid-1990's, the project, run by an Iraqi-born scholar, Kanan Makiya, and a few colleagues, has been cataloging, verifying and translating a huge archive of official Iraqi documents illuminating the workings of Saddam Hussein's regime.

The bulk of the papers were seized by Kurdish rebels from captured government buildings after Iraq's defeat in the 1991 gulf war, and turned over to the Kurds' American protectors. Other documents came from liberated Kuwait and, more recently, from inside Iraq. All told, they now number well over three million.

Some were published or excerpted following the 1991 war, but those were just the tip of the iceberg. More continue to be translated, and the Harvard project's Web site (www.fas.harvard.edu/irdp/) is periodically updated with new material. Here are excerpts. TOM KUNTZ

This is a 1987 communiqué from the northern Iraqi command, after it had begun an operation code-named ''Termination of Traitors'' to crush Kurdish insurgents during Iraq's eight-year war with neighboring Iran. It quotes the Iraqi overlord in the north, a cousin of Mr. Hussein, complaining that troops were executing Kurds before they had outlived their usefulness:

The Baath Arab Socialist Party

The Qutr of Iraq Northern Organization Bureau Command Number: 5083 (Secretariat Office)

Date 22 Aug. 1987

Confidential and Personal

To: First Corps Command

Subject: Execution of Criminals

Comradely Salute,

[Re:] your personal and confidential letter [No.] 352 on 8 Aug. 1987.

The valiant comrade, Ali Hasan al-Majid, commander of the Northern Organization Bureau, has commented as follows on your aforementioned letter: ''We do not object to the decapitation of traitors. But it would have been preferable had you also sent them to Security for the purpose of interrogating them. [Security personnel] could have found with them other significant information that could have been useful, prior to their execution.''

Kindly review . . .

Respectfully,

Tahir Tawfiq

Secretary of Northern Affairs Committee

An Iraqi military intelligence telegram dated May 25, 1987, affirms that Iraq tried out chemical bombs on the Kurds before the 1988 ''Anfal'' campaign, during which chemical attacks killed thousands in the city of Halabja. This early attack, however, wasn't so successful:

Four chemical bombs were dropped but only one detonated, inflicting four women with tearful eyes. They were taken to Belkchar hospital for treatment.

As this 1979 loyalty oath shows, absolute fealty to the ruling party was strictly enforced:

Decree of the Revolutionary Command Council

Punishable by execution:

(1) Any member of the Baath Arab Socialist Party who conceals on purpose his previous political and party affiliations and commitments.

(2) Any current or former member of the Party who, under proof, is found to be linked during his membership to any other party or political [group]. . . .

(3) Any current or former member of the Party and it is proved that, after terminating his relations with the Party, joined another party or political [group] or worked for them. . . .

I, Majid Arshad Mahmud, have been apprised of the Revolutionary Command Council's decree, and will be responsible before the law in the event I violate the decree's provisions.

Common criminals in Iraq face amputation. A decree in Jumhuriya, an official newspaper:

Revolutionary Command Council Resolutions

I -- Laws Mandating the Death Penalty and Limb Amputation. . . .

Date: June 4, 1994

To cut off the right hand of thieves, and cut off the foot if repeated a second time . . .

(1) According to Section 1, Article 42 of the Iraqi Constitution, the Revolutionary Command Council is permitted to punish the criminal by cutting off the right hand from the wrist. The categories of theft are defined in Chapter 440/441/442/443/444/445 of the Crime Law Number 111 (1969), and amendment number 117 of the Iraqi Crimes Military Law number 13 (1940). First-time offenders of auto theft will have their hand cut off; if the crime is committed a second time -- the left foot will be severed. . . .

(2) The death penalty will be administered to those who hold either concealed or unconcealed weapons in committing a theft, which results in a murder. . . .

Signed by Saddam Hussein, President of the Revolutionary Command Council

Later, the penalty for repeat offenders was either stiffened or modified, according to this decree in the official daily Thawra:

Date: Aug. 18. 1994

(1) According to Section l, Article 42 of the Iraqi Constitution, the Revolutionary Command Council is permitted to Brand an ''X'' on the forehead of those individuals who repeat the crime for which their hand was cut off. The mark will be one centimeter in length and one millimeter in width.

(2) The branding will take place at the same hospital where the initial right hand was cut.

(3) The general hospitals will provide the local hospitals with the medical needs and assistance to carry out these orders. . . .

Saddam Hussein

Just after the allied coalition launched its air war to dislodge Iraq from Kuwait in January 1991, an apparently desperate Mr. Hussein issued an order to lure back army deserters with an amnesty, but also kill those who didn't return. A cover note to top commanders warned, ''Don't broadcast nor publish [this decree], nor leak its content to hostile parties, except the first paragraph dealing with the amnesty'':

Revolutionary Command Council

Decree No. 20

Date of Decree: . . . 18 Jan. 1991

According to provisions of article [No.] 42 of the constitution, the Revolutionary Command Council decreed the following:

(1) Deserters, AWOL's and dodgers of the military service before issuance of this decree will be cleared of crimes of desertion and AWOL, if they return to the national rank within 15 days beginning 18 Jan. 1991 if in Iraq and 30 days for those who are abroad.

(2-1) The Party Organization shall execute military service deserters, who will be arrested once the period in paragraph (1) has expired. . . .

(3-1) The Party Organization shall execute members of any division command of the Baath Arab Socialist Party, including officials of security and police, if it could be proven that they were aware of the presence of deserters . . . and failed to act against them or inform authorities. . . .

Saddam Hussein

Collective punishment of family members was routine in the rebellious Kurdish north throughout the 1980's. This communiqué concerns a Kurd who defected from the Iraqi military:

To: al-Baida Directorate of Security

From: Sulaimaniya Directorate of Security

Date: 14 Dec. 1985

Record No. 596: We were informed that Mahmud Muhammad Faraj Fattah is a deserter with the saboteurs. His father currently works at the cigarette factory. The director [of Sulaimaniya's security] instructed that the father of the saboteur, along with his family, be arrested. Please be informed and inform us, kindly.

According to this communiqué, there was a curt process to make sure families learned of the execution of relatives who had been rounded up:

Confidential and Personal

Directorate of Security, Irbil Governorate

Date: 11 Sep. 1989

To: Shaqlawa Directorate of Security. . . .

Enclosed is the death certificate of the executed criminal Anwar Abdel-Rahman Aba Bakr Karim, resident of Diyana compound. Please receive it, inform his father of his fate and hand him the above certificate with utmost calm and secrecy. Let us know with a signed receipt from his father. Keep one copy at the above-mentioned branch and send us the second.

Even after such executions, the regime kept tabs on relatives:

Branch Command of Irbil, Division Command of al-Sadiq/Highly Confidential. . . .

Date: 12 Apr. 1982

To: All Organizations. . . .

Comradely Salute. . . .

You are requested to inform us, within one week of the above date, where there are families of executed individuals in your sectors.

Draw an inventory list comprising the name of the executed individual, including the degree of his kinship to the remaining family members.

Respectfully,

May You Live for the Struggle

Comrade, Qasem Saleh Souhail,

Secretary of Irbil Branch command
