THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.S. WILL ASK U.N. TO STATE HUSSEIN HAS NOT DISARMED
By David E. Sanger With Elisabeth Bumiller
Feb. 14, 2003

The Bush administration is drafting a United Nations Security Council resolution with Britain declaring that Saddam Hussein has failed to disarm, and must now face unspecified ''consequences,'' senior administration officials said today.

The resolution, which they expect to present next week, is designed to counter efforts by France and Germany to give the search for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq more heft and more time, an approach that administration officials insist would be futile. Senior officials describe the drafts of the resolution as a short restatement of key passages of Resolution 1441, passed unanimously in November.

It would conclude, one official said today, with ''words to the effect that Saddam didn't avail himself of his final chance to disarm, and will now face the 'serious consequences' we've been talking about.'' It makes no specific reference to military action, although that is clearly the intent.

The Security Council is scheduled to meet Friday morning to hear another update from the leaders of the inspection teams, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei. In advance of their presentations, President Bush, speaking today to thousands of sailors at the Mayport Naval Station near Jacksonville, Fla., challenged the United Nations to enforce Iraqi compliance with 17 resolutions the Security Council has passed regarding it since the end of the Persian Gulf war.

''The decision is this for the United Nations: When you say something does it mean anything?'' Mr. Bush said, standing in front of the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy and alongside a Navy cruiser that launched some of the first Tomahawk missiles into Afghanistan. Mr. Bush said he was still ''optimistic'' that the Security Council would show ''backbone'' and confront Iraq.

''I believe when it's all said and done, free nations will not allow the United Nations to fade into history as an ineffective, irrelevant debating society,'' Mr. Bush said.

But France and Germany continue to press the case that Mr. Hussein is contained as long as inspectors are in the country, and that Mr. Bush is simply rushing the schedule to meet the Pentagon's desire to conduct military action when the weather is still cool. France, Russia and China -- each of which has differing levels of reservations -- are all permanent members of the Security Council, with the power to veto any resolution.

Mr. Bush's aides do not seem especially concerned about the prospect of a veto. But they concede they do not know if they have the votes to pass what one official called ''a clearly worded resolution.'' Several officials expressed fear today that the deep divide over Iraq that has already triggered a crisis within the NATO alliance -- a formal meeting of NATO ambassadors was called off today -- may soon engulf the European Union.

Clearly worried about that prospect, Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, wrote a letter today to his fellow European Union leaders, demanding that they support military action when they meet next week.

''While we all of course regard military action as a last resort,'' Mr. Blair said, ''we must make clear that no member state rules it out if needed to uphold the authority'' of the Security Council.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, appearing before the House Budget Committee, repeated that he was still hopeful that the United States could bridge differences with European allies. He argued that much depends on the report from the weapons inspectors on Friday, including their finding that Iraq had violated limits imposed by the Security Council on the range of its missiles.

''I think this is a serious matter,'' Mr. Powell said of this finding, though other experts say that if the Iraqi missiles had greater range than permitted, it was by a margin of 20 to 30 miles. ''It shows, if that's what he confirms tomorrow in his presentation, it shows continued Iraqi noncompliance and it would be a serious matter.''

Iraq's deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, dismissed the reports about the missiles when he arrived in Italy today to meet Pope John Paul II at Vatican City.

''There is no serious violation,'' he told reporters. ''It should not be exaggerated.''

In an interview published today in Italy's leading newspaper, Corriere della Sera, Mr. Aziz called Mr. Bush ''the new Hitler,'' and questioned why the Italian government has sided with him. ''What have we done to the Italians?'' he was quoted as asking.

Mr. Bush's aides are increasingly frustrated by calls from France and Germany -- and Russia -- to take more time with inspections, while containing Iraq's power.

They argue that Mr. Bush yielded to calls last year that he take the issue to the Security Council, patiently negotiated over the content of Resolution 1441 over seven and a half weeks, and agreed to seek a second resolution. But they say that the moment has finally come for the enforcement of the resolution -- and it is time for the rest of the world to move toward Mr. Bush's position, and acknowledge Iraq's refusal to disarm.

The president seemed to give voice to his frustration today in Florida, where the martial background chosen for his remarks made clear that he is ready for military action.

''At any moment during the last 97 days -- and during the last 12 years -- Saddam Hussein could have completely and immediately disarmed himself. Instead, he's used all this time to build and to hide weapons. He must be hoping that by stalling he'll buy himself another 12 years.''

''He's wrong,'' the president said to applause.

Mr. Bush continues to insist, in public and in private, that he is fully prepared to assemble a coalition outside of the Security Council. But a range of his closest allies have cautioned him in recent days that the broader the consensus he can build within the United Nations, the quieter the streets of Europe and Southeast Asia may be if war breaks out.

''This isn't something we need,'' a senior American official said of the additional resolution, ''but rather something that would make the politics of this a lot easier for friends and allies. So we'll give it a try.''

Although Mr. Bush said that military force was still a last option, his remarks at the naval station were taken as a battle cry toward what the sailors said was the foregone conclusion of an American attack on Iraq.

''There's no if, it's only when it's going to happen,'' said Freddy Patell, 18, an airman apprentice on the carrier John F. Kennedy, which returned here last August after four months in the North Arabian Sea. ''The sooner the better. Just go get it over with and stop worrying.''

The White House carefully paired the president's combat talk to the sailors with a quick visit to a forum in nearby Jacksonville to promote his 10-year tax cut plan to small business owners -- a tableau designed to stress that Mr. Bush had not lost sight of the nation's economic troubles at a time of threatening war. But the president's trip was intended largely as part of the intensifying White House campaign to rally Americans toward support of the war, and to put pressure on the United Nations Security Council to take on Mr. Hussein by force.

Mr. Bush spent 40 brisk minutes at the economic forum, changed into a Navy flight jacket, then delivered his most impassioned words in his speech to the sailors, invoking the memory of one of his Democratic predecessors, John F. Kennedy, who understood, he said, ''that dangers to freedom had to be confronted early and decisively.'' The American military, he added, will protect America and its allies from ''these thugs.''

Echoing comments made this week by his advisers about aid to a post-Hussein Iraq, Mr. Bush said that his quarrel was not with the Iraqis. ''In case of conflict, this great nation is already putting plans and supplies into place, so that food and other humanitarian relief will flow quickly to the Iraqi people,'' Mr. Bush said.
