The World: War Games; For Each Audience, Another Secret Plan to Attack Iraq
By Christopher Marquis
Aug. 11, 2002


FOR all its reputation as a taciturn crowd, the Bush administration is downright chatty when it comes to Iraq. Officials who were tight-lipped about energy strategy and homeland security have taken to analyzing in detail a battle that the president insists he has not decided on. They have begun tallying up its costs before a single shot has been fired.

Is this any way to prepare for war?

We'll see. With their televised briefings and whispered confidences, administration officials are attempting to achieve several things at once. They are clearing the ground for battle by addressing three distinct audiences: the American public, the international community and the Iraqi regime.

Each group requires its own careful handling. Americans must be rallied in support of striking a country that has not done them direct harm. Allies must be persuaded that war to rout Saddam Hussein's arsenal is a better choice than the current policy of containment. And Mr. Hussein must be bottled up in a scoundrel's isolation.

At the same time, the administration planners are struggling with deep internal divisions over the best way to oust Mr. Hussein. This dispute is being played out publicly, through official statements and surreptitious leaks, a common practice when it comes to tax policy but extremely rare with military strategy.

It is a multidimensional chess game, devilishly complicated by instant communications and the broader context of an antiterror war with no fixed borders or base.

However tricky the task, administration officials seem to have decided their first order of business is to brace the public for a potentially nasty conflict in a highly volatile region. If and when Mr. Hussein feels cornered, they assert, Americans may fall victim to especially horrid defenses.

In addition, officials are rattling sabers, hoping this will keep Mr. Hussein in a state of unease. Some of their bluster is designed to embolden Mr. Hussein's opponents or stir confusion about American intentions.

The White House is beating the drum. War seems a foregone conclusion. Congress, the branch with the constitutional right to declare war, has been remarkably quiescent -- even with the House majority leader, Representative Dick Armey, challenging the White House war talk on Thursday.

''It's almost as if we were going to a three-act drama and we're already getting the first act,'' said John Morton Blum, an emeritus professor of history at Yale.

For all their talk, however, administration officials have not yet made a case for war that would ensure public support, critics say. President Bush must deliver a major speech on the subject, they say, and also secure the vocal support of Congress.

''You have not had the president articulate why Saddam Hussein needs to be removed,'' said Lee Hamilton, the former Democratic congressman who now heads the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. ''He has not made the case that Saddam Hussein is an imminent threat to the United States.''

Mr. Bush has succeeded, however, in vilifying Mr. Hussein in the public mind. Personifying the enemy and declaring him evil is a well-established tactic for rallying public opinion. During World War I, there was a popular front focused on hanging the kaiser, catalyzed, in part, by American propaganda about how the Germans supposedly cut off the hands of Belgian children. In World War II, Adolf Hitler personified the enemy.

MEANWHILE, some foreign affairs analysts say all the current talk about operational details is grossly irresponsible, because it could compromise American troops.

''I find it terrifying,'' said Kenneth M. Pollack, an expert on Iraq at the Council on Foreign Relations. ''I am very uncomfortable with the level of public debate over the military strategy.'' This discussion, he said, should be on whether to attack, not how.

But others see a more deliberate hand in the stream of analysis by war-planners.

''A lot of it is intentional,'' said Michael D. McCurry, who was a press secretary in the Clinton administration. ''They're talking about it to generate debate.'' When the president makes a decision that could cost lives and treasure, Mr. McCurry said, ''nobody will be able to say it's out of the clear blue sky.''

Keith E. Eiler, a research fellow in history at the Hoover Institution, said the discussion of the various attack strategies appears to be part of a propaganda campaign. ''It has occurred to me that part of this may be a deception plan, an aspect of psychological warfare which we're playing,'' he said.

He recalled how, during World War II, the Allies tricked the Germans into believing that they would invade France directly across the Channel. They arranged a program of leaks to the press, set up fake encampments and fabricated communications traffic. When D-Day came, they swept into Normandy on a southern path that took the Germans by surprise.

CLEARLY, some of the current talk aims at settling competing ideas about whether to wage a full-scale invasion or something more limited. With the aid of an avid press, some of the first disclosures pitted the Joint Chiefs -- who favored a robust invasion reminiscent of the Persian Gulf war -- against advocates of a model akin to what the United States pursued in Afghanistan, relying on Iraqi opposition forces and air power. The latter strategy was favored by Gen. Wayne A. Downing, the White House deputy national security adviser for terrorism. He resigned shortly after the dispute became public.

Last month, a person with access to a classified military planning document outlined a three-front assault for The New York Times. The source, clearly advocating a specific view, complained that the approach showed a troubling lack of creativity.

Officially, the administration is furious over such leaks. Donald H. Rumsfeld, the defense secretary, ordered an investigation into the planning document incident. ''If people start treating war plans like they're paper airplanes and they can fly them around this building and throw them to anybody who wants them, I think it's outrageous,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''It's inexcusable, and they ought to be in jail.''

But even Mr. Rumsfeld is not immune from publicly musing about sensitive plans. Last week, for example, he lamented that air power alone would not be sufficient to destroy Iraq's mobile weapons laboratories, suggesting the need for a strong component of ground forces.

Political observers say the administration seems determined to muddy the waters with disinformation to cover up earlier leaks. That would explain recent calls for containing Iraq even as the war planning intensifies.

''The administration is attempting to recreate the fog of war and undo any damage,'' said Mr. Pollack, whose book on Iraq, ''The Threatening Storm,'' will be released this fall.

Once a decision has been made to fight, the administration needs a cause for war. Pearl Harbor provided an undeniable causus belli, but others required some imagination: the sinking of the Maine, the Gulf of Tonkin, the threat to American medical students in Grenada. Administration officials have said privately that a final attempt to introduce weapons inspectors into Iraq -- and Mr. Hussein's refusal -- could provide the rationale.

It is still unclear whether Mr. Bush would seek a declaration of war from Congress before launching a strike. The United States has a recent history of undeclared warfare, for example, in Vietnam, and the president may commit troops for up to two months without Congressional action under the War Powers Act.

In the Persian Gulf, Congress never formally declared war, but voted to support the first President Bush in using force to evict Mr. Hussein's forces from Kuwait.

With all this talk, one might wonder whether the administration is so confident of victory that it can dispense with that old-fashioned notion of surprise.

Kenneth N. Waltz, a professor of political science at Columbia University, said the cacophony of voices will ultimately befuddle the enemy, rather than tip him off.

''We have now talked about so many possibilities, Saddam Hussein is going to have a hard time figuring out which possibility will come into being,'' Mr. Waltz said. ''That's one way to confuse an adversary.''
