BUSH MAY REQUEST CONGRESS'S BACKING ON IRAQ, AIDES SAY
By Neil A. Lewis With David E. Sanger
Aug. 29, 2002


Senior administration officials said today that they expected President Bush eventually to seek some new explicit sign of approval from Congress -- but not necessarily a formal vote -- before launching any military campaign against Iraq.

At the same time, officials in Washington and in Crawford, Tex., where Mr. Bush is in the last four days of vacation at his ranch, are engaged in an intense debate over whether they should seek to involve the United Nations one last time to bolster the case they want to make in Congress against Saddam Hussein.

As one top adviser described the argument, Mr. Bush must decide ''whether to go it alone or go to the U.N.'' with one final if largely symbolic effort to force Mr. Hussein to re-admit arms inspectors, who left Iraq three and a half years ago.

While Mr. Bush has not expressed an opinion on that issue, a White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, told reporters today in Crawford that ''our goal is disarmament,'' and added, ''we know that we can't verify disarmament.''

Although the officials said a consensus had been reached among Mr. Bush's advisers about how to proceed with Congress, one senior official cautioned tonight that Mr. Bush had not reviewed any final recommendations and that members of the cabinet had not yet discussed the subject.

''We haven't gotten there yet,'' the official said.

Despite confident assertions by the White House this week that the president has all the legal authority and Congressional approval he needs for an invasion of Iraq, officials said there was in fact widespread recognition that it would be unwise to attack without a new expression of support from Congress.

One official suggested that the statements indicating that new Congressional approval was not necessary were a way of preparing the ground for talks with lawmakers. The official added that the assertion might make Congress more pliant on the nature or wording of any statement backing military action.

It was ''like the opening round in a negotiation,'' said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

Many lawmakers have lined up to denounce the administration for asserting that the 1991 resolution authorizing the Persian Gulf war provides a legal justification for a new invasion. One official said that while there may be a by-the-book legal argument, ''it's very hard to get away with it in a political sense.''

As if to underscore that point, Senator John Warner of Virginia, the ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee, today complained of ''an information gap'' between the White House and Congress and called for Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to be summoned to the committee to explain the need for military action.

In Crawford, Mr. Bush and his aides have spent considerable time weighing the potential benefits and risks of turning to the United Nations in a last-ditch effort to develop an international consensus that Mr. Hussein must go, officials said.

Some administration officials believe that another rebuff from Mr. Hussein regarding inspectors would strengthen the administration's case before Congress. But a failure to win Security Council approval of military action to enforce Iraq's commitment to disarm after the gulf war could undercut the administration.

Secretary General Kofi Annan seemed to confirm those fears at a news conference today in Botswana, when he said, ''The U.N. is not agitating for military action'' against Iraq.

China and Russia, which both have veto power in the Security Council, oppose military action. France, which also holds a veto, has demanded a Security Council vote and has made it clear it would oppose military action without evidence of an imminent threat from Iraq.

The debate over whether to continue demanding unfettered weapons inspections and whether to seek explicit Security Council approval for action accelerated this week in part because it became evident that Vice President Dick Cheney and a former secretary of state, James A. Baker III, who was a close confidant of the former President Bush, see the issue quite differently.

Mr. Cheney made clear on Monday that the return of inspectors to Iraq, even if they could act freely, would be useless and dangerous, because it may allow Mr. Hussein more time to proceed with weapons development.

But Mr. Baker argued in an essay Sunday on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times that returning to the United Nations is a political necessity, a view heard often in the State Department.

Some senior American diplomats said this week that Mr. Baker may have been acting as a surrogate for the former president, and that the essay was an effort to make sure the younger Mr. Bush heard the counsel of those outside the most hawkish administration circles.

Mr. Bush has not declared himself on this issue, but the working assumption in the White House is that he agrees with Mr. Cheney. ''Cheney doesn't freelance,'' one senior official said.

In disclosing this week that Alberto R. Gonzales, the White House counsel, had told the president that he has all the authority he needs to wage war against Iraq, the White House reopened a debate that has periodically vexed policymakers: Can a president launch a war without explicit Congressional approval?

Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, told reporters that Mr. Gonzales concluded that the authority to invade Iraq rests on three legs: the 1991 resolution endorsing the Persian Gulf war, a Congressional resolution enacted just after the Sept. 11 attacks and the president's role as commander in chief.

In reaching back to the 1991 resolution, the administration quickly drew critics both in Congress and outside government.

Anne-Marie Slaughter, the incoming dean at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University and an authority on international law, said: ''Using the authorization from 1991 would be an enormous stretch. The idea that Congress would authorize the use of force more than a decade later is something that the text could be stretched to cover, but it would completely contravene the spirit of the resolution and the underlying constitutional values at stake.''

Senator Robert S. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, joined others in Congress in criticizing Mr. Gonzales's conclusions. ''It should come as no surprise that the White House lawyers, who draw their paychecks from the executive branch, are straining to defend the president's attempted power grab,'' he said on Tuesday.

While officials emphasized that no final decision had been made on how to approach Congress, they said extensive internal discussions had taken place. It remained unclear whether the administration would seek support in the form of a resolution, which would require a vote in either or both houses, or some other assent, like a statement from Congressional leaders.

Although the Constitution grants Congress the power to declare war, presidents have resisted the notion that they must seek approval before dispatching troops. Scholars have estimated that presidents have sent forces abroad 120 to 200 times, but Congress has only formally declared war on five occasions: the War of 1812, the Mexican War, the Spanish-American War and the two world wars.

The first President Bush sought Congressional approval for the gulf war, but he did so under pressure, portraying his action as a courtesy to Congress.

Administration officials said they believe that the 1991 resolution would apply to a new invasion for several reasons. One senior official said that in addition to requiring the expulsion of Iraqi forces from Kuwait, the resolution gave the president the authority to use military force to restore peace and security.

The officials said evidence of the continuing applicability of the 1991 resolution was the enforcement of no-flight zones over portions of Iraq.
Correction: Aug. 31, 2002
A front-page article on Thursday about views in the White House and Congress on the possibility of a military strike against Iraq misspelled the surname of the White House counsel in some copies. He is Alberto R. Gonzales, not Gonzalez. The article also misstated Senator Robert C. Byrd's middle initial.
