THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; IRAQ REJECTS PUSH BY U.S. TO TOUGHEN INSPECTION RULES
By Julia Preston With Patrick E. Tyler
Sept. 29, 2002

Iraq today rejected a proposal by the United States and Britain for a Security Council resolution imposing tough weapons inspections, saying that it would not accept any new rules for the work of United Nations inspectors.

Diplomats from Washington and London shuttled to Moscow and Beijing today after consulting in Paris, trying to overcome strong objections to the draft resolution among the other three permanent, veto-bearing members of the Security Council. The proposal gives Iraq 30 days to make full disclosure of its weapons of mass destruction and provides for unfettered inspections, authorizing a military attack if Baghdad does not comply.

In Baghdad, Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan of Iraq said that his government had agreed to allow the weapons inspectors to return under conditions laid down previously by the United Nations and that it would not accept new terms.

''The stance on the inspectors has been decided, and any additional procedure that aims at harming Iraq will not be accepted,'' Mr. Ramadan told reporters. He rejected as ''lies'' the accusations by Bush administration officials of ties between President Saddam Hussein and Al Qaeda.

Iraq's deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, warned that the United States would sustain heavy losses in an attack and pledged that Iraq would fight a fierce war.

The Bush administration quickly responded that the resolution was up to the Security Council to decide. ''Iraq does not have a say in this matter,'' said Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary. ''Even if they did, it again shows that they want to string things out, change their tune and build up their arms.''

Even as the diplomacy continued, the United States and Britain signaled their determination to take military action if Iraq did not comply with their tough demands. The resolution they have drafted would give Iraq one week to make an initial weapons declaration and to accept the Security Council's terms, and a further 23 days to disclose all of its weapons programs, the start of disarmament under United Nations supervision.

In his weekly radio address today, President Bush lobbied for another resolution he is seeking before moving forward: a Congressional resolution authorizing the use of force.

''By passing this resolution, we will send a clear message to the world community and to the Iraqi regime the demands of the United Nations Security Council must be followed: the Iraqi dictator must be disarmed,'' Mr. Bush said.

''These requirements will be met, or they will be enforced,'' he said.

After several days of debate in which leading Democrats have spoken against giving Mr. Bush the free military hand he has sought, the president said he remained optimistic that Congress would in the end approve a war powers resolution.

''We're making progress, we are nearing agreement, and soon we will speak with one voice,'' he said.

In Moscow today, Marc Grossman, the American under secretary of state for political affairs, worked to persuade Russian officials, including Foreign Minister Igor S. Ivanov, to accept the new resolution. After the discussions, which lasted for more than two hours, Mr. Grossman expressed optimism, although he did not mention any details about the American and British draft proposal.

''Everyone agreed that there is a challenge to the United Nations,'' he said. ''I think all members of the Security Council want to see if we can solve it.''

Russian officials, however, were more reserved. Mr. Ivanov, in an official statement after the meeting, reiterated Russia's position that weapons inspectors should return to Iraq immediately on the basis of existing Security Council resolutions.

Only international inspectors ''should give the answer to whether there are weapons of mass destruction there,'' he said, referring to Iraq, in the statement.

British officials said today that the Defense Ministry was pulling up to 4,000 of its front-line troops off domestic assignments and placing them in a high state of readiness to join more than 60,000 American forces based in the region or heading there. These forces are expected to double by December, American officials say, if Mr. Bush goes forward with a large call-up of reserves followed by the deployment of major air and ground forces to the gulf.

The Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, traveled to Tehran today to seek support from Iran, which had been one of Iraq's most bitter enemies after a war from 1980 to 1988.

Arriving at the airport in Tehran, Mr. Sabri said the real ''axis of evil'' was Washington and Tel Aviv, borrowing President Bush's phrase for Iraq, Iran and North Korea. Mr. Sabri noted the rift on the Security Council over Washington's proposal.

Hans Blix, leading the team of United Nations inspectors preparing for a return to Baghdad, departed today for Vienna, where on Monday morning the team will sit down with three Iraqi military officials and make an initial set of demands to smooth the transport of more than 280 inspectors into the country around mid-October.

An official from the inspection team said Mr. Blix was not concerned that his mandate from the Security Council would not be clear by Monday because this meeting was about ''practical arrangements'' relating to transportation, housing and communications. Still, given the attention riveted on Iraq, Mr. Blix's encounter will be an early test of Baghdad's willingness to allow unconditional and unfettered access.

French officials said today that President Bush had thus far failed to persuade President Jacques Chirac to back the stringent American and British draft resolution that would demand that the Iraqi leader admit his ''material breach'' of past disarmament resolutions.

Russian and French diplomats have said they fear that Washington wants to increase the Council's demands so sharply that Baghdad will balk, and the weapons inspections will never get under way.

It was too early to determine whether Russia, China and France would be able to force a compromise on Mr. Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, representing the other two permanent members of the Security Council, or would offer a competing proposal.

The compromise France was seeking would give the 15-member body a role in authorizing war through a second resolution should Mr. Hussein reject or obstruct the return of United Nations inspectors. Mr. Bush and his national security advisers oppose the two-resolution approach, but much was still under discussion, including how Security Council members might travel to Iraq with a military guard to protect them, diplomats said, and directly supervise the work of inspectors.

Mr. Grossman was in Moscow today after stopping in Paris, to press the American and British draft. The precise text was being tightly held to preserve room for compromise, diplomats said.

Separately, Britain dispatched two senior diplomats, Peter Ricketts, to Paris and Moscow, and William Ehrman to Beijing, for negotiations.

Meanwhile, Iraqi opposition forces in northern Iraq observed Iraqi military forces pulling back from front-line positions facing the Kurds. In one area near Erbil, the Kurdish capital, Iraqi forces had retreated 10 miles. Kurds speculated that Iraqi commanders were widening the distance to prevent defections. Control points between the Kurdish enclave and central Iraq were also being tightened to prevent defections and infiltrations, officials said.

Mr. Hussein was also said to have replaced several crucial governors, including in the southern Basra region, with officers from his security forces to bolster discipline against defections and betrayal.

Iraqi opposition members were lining up to volunteer for American training as fighters, interpreters, spies and target spotters, after the State Department announced that it would use part of the $92 million allocated under the Iraq Liberation Act to train thousands of recruits from the Iraqi opposition, as well as members of the Kurdish minority in northern Iraq.

The United States has also increased the tempo of patrols and bombing missions into Iraq, administration officials said. These patrols were authorized by the United Nations to enforce no-flight zones to prevent Iraq's air forces from attacking Shiites in the south and Kurds in the north. There have been 42 such bombing missions this year, Pentagon officials said.
