A NATION AT WAR: APPROACH TO CAPITAL; INFANTRY ATTACKS BAGHDAD DEFENSE WITH FIRST PROBES
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 31, 2003

American Marine and Army infantry units arrayed along a broad front south of Baghdad on Sunday made their first probing attacks against the Republican Guard division at Karbala, about 65 miles from the capital, after a week of heavy aerial bombardment on the Iraqi forces that guard the approaches to Saddam Hussein's stronghold.

In Baghdad, another round of airstrikes began early this morning. Bombing also continued on the city's southern outskirts, where at least two Republican Guard divisions are deployed, as the 5,000-member Second Brigade of the Third Infantry Division wheeled its armored columns north from the region around Najaf, 100 miles south of the capital, to begin engaging them.

The probing attacks were not the opening act of the battle for Baghdad, but were nonetheless intended to shape the coming battle and re-establish allied momentum. American commanders have made no secret of their determination to keep the pressure on Mr. Hussein.

''We just want to maintain the initiative,'' said Maj. Michael G. Birmingham, spokesman for the Third Division. ''We don't want to dig in our heels here.'' [Map, Page B16.]

Momentum has been stalled in recent days by fierce attacks on allied supply lines. This has led to recriminations over whether allied commanders misjudged the willingness of Mr. Hussein's loyalists to resist and underestimated the size of the armed force needed to subdue them.

The American commander in the region, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, spoke publicly on Sunday in defense of his war plan, as did two of his superiors, Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld.

General Franks said his war strategy was being misperceived by ''pundits'' who believe ''we are in an operational pause.''

''It's simply not the case,'' he said at his headquarters in Qatar. ''There is a continuity of operations in this plan. That continuity has been seen. It will be seen in the days ahead.''

Despite General Franks's confidence, the situation in Iraq appeared tense. The war continued to unfold as a far more complex tapestry than expected, with dispersed engagements, political and psychological warfare against Mr. Hussein's government, mobilization to deliver aid in the south, frenetic diplomacy and shifting explanations at home about the war's duration and cost.

There was no sign of any crumbling of the Hussein government, which vowed a wave of suicide bombings against American troops.

After days of consolidation, there appeared to be some momentum today for the allied forces. To the east, thousands of soldiers from the First Marine Division moved north from their static lines to engage Iraqi forces in towns along the highway approach to Baghdad, military officials said. Brig. Gen. John F. Kelly, the division's assistant commander, described the operations as ''liberation tactics'' intended to break the hold of officials of Mr. Hussein's Baath Party who are still mobilizing guerrilla-style attacks.

''People are beginning to rat them out,'' General Kelly said after a raid on one Baath Party headquarters where weapons were seized, though the local Baath leader escaped. There were no reports of casualties.

British forces fought intense battles in and around Basra, the southern Iraqi city of 1.5 million. American and British officials expressed guarded optimism that they were close to breaking Baghdad's hold over the city and establishing a secure zone to begin aid deliveries.

Early on Sunday, Royal Marine commandos killed a Republican Guard colonel believed to be directing irregular forces that have fired on civilians trying to flee the city.

But the day was not without casualties. A Marine UH-1 Huey helicopter crashed in southern Iraq at a refueling station, killing three crewmen, a military spokesman said.

A British soldier was killed in fighting near Basra, 340 miles from Baghdad, and several others were injured, the Defense Ministry in London said.

More than a dozen soldiers were injured in Kuwait when a contract worker at a rear-area base drove his truck into a line waiting to enter the camp store. The driver was shot after he prepared to make a second run at the injured.

With combat operations resuming at the front, the rear area blazed with fresh Marine helicopter assaults on Nasiriya, where Hellfire missiles were fired into blocks of houses and buildings on the Euphrates waterfront.

General Franks, at Central Command headquarters, was vague in responding to reports that he had pressed for a delay in starting combat operations when Turkey refused to allow the passage of the Fourth Infantry Division through its territory. The division was to have led an advance to Baghdad from the north.

''The fact of the matter is that it was quite important, strategically and operationally, to have that very heavy force precisely where it was until the day it moved,'' he said, ''and I wouldn't really speculate as to why. I'll leave it to each of you to determine why that was.''

Whatever concerns General Franks might have had about the loss of a muscular northern component from his battle plan, he insisted that he had opted nonetheless to start the ground war early to stop Iraqi forces from destroying the country's richest oil fields.

General Myers, speaking on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, said criticism of the war plan was not fair. ''Nobody ever promised a short war,'' he said. ''This is going to be a tough war, a tough slog yet, and no responsible official I know has ever said anything different.'' Speaking on ''Face the Nation'' on CBS, he said that Republican Guard strength had already been reduced by half.

The equipment ships of the Fourth Infantry Division passed through the Suez Canal last week, and its soldiers were set to fly to Kuwait over the next two weeks to form up in the desert and join the battle.

The Third Infantry Division, already seasoned by sandstorms and dozens of harassment attacks, has been mired for nearly a week in an encirclement of Najaf, a holy site in the eyes of its predominantly Shiite population. As the Third Infantry prepared to advance against the Medina Division of the Republican Guard on Sunday, it was relieved by the 101st Airborne, which now has the task of pacifying Najaf while also using its helicopter assault squadrons to support the ground campaign against the Medina, at Karbala.

British warplanes struck a fuel depot in Karbala on Sunday as coalition air forces carried out some of the most intense bombardments of the war against the Republican Guard positions, military officials said.

In Baghdad this morning, an American cruise missile appeared to damage the Information Ministry complex. Another airstrike later hit a palace used by Mr. Hussein's son Qusay, the commander of the Republican Guard.

On Sunday, bombs and cruise missiles struck a large training center and barracks for the fedayeen fighters who have attacked the army's rear area in the south.

Allied airstrikes also returned to pummel the Abu Garayb palace of Mr. Hussein, just east of Baghdad's international airport, as well as the Karada intelligence compound on the Tigris River, the Central Command said.

In Kuwait, where the aid effort is being coordinated, Maj. Gen. Albert Whitley, a British commander, said drinking water is ''the most significant requirement.''

Water treatment plants are not reliable, he said, and people have been drinking polluted water from the Tigris, which he called ''a floating sewer.'' He disputed Baghdad's claim that it had provided most households with a six-month supply of food. Most families have 30 to 60 days' worth, he said. But he cautioned that if the fedayeen start forcing people to leave their homes and flee the city, ''a real crisis'' could follow.

Marauding gunmen from Baghdad's security forces in the Basra region were holding up plans for distributing aid, said Michael Marx, the leader of the emergency response teams of the United States Agency for International Development. Mr. Marx said at a news conference in Kuwait City that his agency's workers were ''not trained to operate in a combat environment.''
