THREATS AND RESPONSES: WEAPONS INSPECTIONS; TOP IRAQI ADVISER SAYS HE BELIEVES WAR IS INEVITABLE
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 26, 2003

Saddam Hussein's top science adviser said today that he feared a United States attack might now be inevitable, regardless of what United Nations inspectors conclude about the last two months of renewed searches for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

''One tends to think it is coming, no matter what we do,'' the adviser, Gen. Amir al-Saadi, said in an interview with foreign reporters.

With tensions rising sharply -- two days before United Nations inspectors deliver a report the Bush administration sees as a crucial measure of Iraqi cooperation -- Secretary of State Colin L. Powell warned reluctant allies not to shrink from any strike on Iraq just because ''the going is getting tough.''

''The burden is upon Iraq,'' Mr. Powell said today after he arrived in Davos, Switzerland, where he consulted with potential allies in any war on Iraq and prepared to deliver a speech at the World Economic Forum on Sunday addressing the prospects for war and the diplomatic confrontation with North Korea over its nuclear program. ''Iraq must comply, or it will be made to comply with military force.''

No decision on using force would be made before President Bush -- who is expected to lay out his position on Iraq in the State of the Union address on Tuesday -- meets Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain on Friday, Mr. Powell said.

In Iraq today, at least three more Iraqi weapons specialists refused to be interviewed in private by United Nations inspectors.

Earlier this week, six other scientists, experts in biological weapons, said they would not speak to inspectors outside the presence of Iraqi government officials -- further evidence, the Bush administration says, that Mr. Hussein is trying to undermine the inspection process.

On Monday, the Iraqi government agreed to measures for greater cooperation with the United Nations in which Iraqi officials said they would ''encourage'' the scientists to grant such interviews. Today, the United Nations decided to interview one of the scientists, a nuclear expert, near the city of Mosul in the presence of a government witness.

The United States deputy defense secretary, Paul D. Wolfowitz, said on Thursday that Washington had evidence that Iraq had threatened to kill scientists and their families if they cooperated with the United Nations inspectors. Iraqi officials insist that they have fulfilled their pledge to the United Nations, but could not force the scientists to speak.

''Our role is just to make that person available, to inform him that he is required for a private interview,'' General Saadi said. ''We do that.''

Saying he still held out hope war could be averted, he strongly defended Iraq's overall cooperation with inspectors and noted that they had been free to visit any site they wanted and that they had still turned up nothing. The United Nations inspectors have said they have not found any ''smoking gun.''

General Saadi challenged the Bush administration's measure of cooperation: that it is up to Iraq, not the inspectors, to prove it does not have weapons.

''The onus is on us to prove we don't have any,'' he said. ''Is that credible? Is that just? How can you prove a negative?''

He said he believed that the United States had reasons other than weapons for staging an attack. He said Iraq was still being punished for invading Kuwait in 1990, which spurred a war that had far more international support than Mr. Bush is receiving now. The general also contended that Iraq was being used as an example to other countries not to oppose the United States.

''They have an agenda which takes priority over anything else -- hegemony,'' he said.

Today, the United Nations mission here confronted two unusual incidents. In the first, about 8 a.m., an Iraqi man with a metal rod and three knives tried to push through security at the United Nations offices here. He was subdued, and no one was hurt.

Half an hour later, a second young Iraqi clutching a notebook and yelling, ''Save me!'' climbed into the car of inspectors who were about to leave to inspect a site. A video of the incident by Associated Press Television News showed an Iraqi officer trying to remove the man from the car, as he yelled in Arabic, ''I have been treated unjustly!''

Yasuhiro Ueki, a spokesman for the inspectors, said they had called United Nations security out of concern about the inspectors' safety, because the incident occurred so soon after the other man had tried to enter with knives. United Nations guards helped remove the Iraqi from the car and handed him over to the Iraqi police. As for the contents of the notebook, Mr. Ueki said, ''My understanding is that it was empty.''

There is, in all, a palpable sense here that the next few days may tell whether Iraq is the target of another American attack. In Switzerland, Mr. Powell planned a round of meetings with representatives of several key allies.

En route to Switzerland, he told reporters that he was convinced that other countries would be willing to assist an American military campaign. ''We will not be alone, that's for sure,'' he said. ''I can rattle off at least a dozen from memory.''

In Davos, he met with Prime Minister Abdullah Gul of Turkey, a country from which the United States is seeking the use of military bases for a possible attack on Iraq despite public opposition. Mr. Powell said the Turks ''understand our needs, and I have a complete understanding of their political situation.''

He also met with Foreign Minister Alexander Downer of Australia and dismissed a proposal by the Swiss foreign minister, Micheline Calmy-Rey, to set up a meeting with the Iraqis in an effort to avert war.

In 1991, just before the Persian Gulf war, Secretary of State James A. Baker III met with senior Iraqi officials in Switzerland in an unsuccessful attempt to persuade Iraq to withdraw its forces from Kuwait.

''We have lots of venues in which one could hold talks,'' Mr. Powell said. ''She made a gracious passing reference to the fact that talks had been held here previously, and that was the extent of her comment.''

On Monday, the two top United Nations arms inspectors, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, will report to the Security Council in New York on the inspections so far.

Inspectors have generally praised Iraq for allowing visits to any site they have requested, but have issued several criticisms, some concerning the level of Iraqi cooperation on interviewing Iraqi scientists in private.

The inspectors, like the Bush administration, also say Iraq's 12,000-page report in December did not provide conclusive proof of destruction of all weapons and arms programs.

In general, the inspectors, as well as France, Germany and Russia, have been urging at least several more weeks of inspections before any attack begins. On Friday, 120 Democrats in Congress delivered Mr. Bush a letter also asking him to grant the inspectors more time.

At the Davos gathering, the Arab League secretary general, Amr Moussa, warned that the United States' war plans were stoking anti-American sentiment in the Muslim world, and that a war thus presented a danger to the United States.

''My point is that the whole Middle East will or could be inflamed, which means that there is a big risk,'' Mr. Moussa said in an interview with Reuters. ''So why take that risk?''

''It will add to the frustration and the agitation of the people in the Middle East,'' he said, and he complained about the ''double standard'' of America: the United States' threat of pursuing a war against Iraq while not solving the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.

In the interview here today, General Saadi said he was buoyed by the level of opposition to an American attack, and he held out some hope war could be avoided. ''We insulate ourselves that war is never coming,'' he said. ''We must do everything within our power not to give them the excuse.''
