THREATS AND RESPONSES: VOICES; Increased Attention on Iraq Is Raising Anxieties, Too
By Jim Yardley
Sept. 28, 2002


Carol Larkin, 51, is a Republican who served in the Navy and voted for President Bush, but do not get her started about a war with Iraq. ''No, no, no,'' she said emphatically. ''I think if we're going to be in Afghanistan, we need to finish that up. Why open two cans of worms when we can't close the first one?''

Gesturing out the window at a town that offers gloomy evidence of the nation's economic slump, Ms. Larkin added that the main problem is at home. Working at a loan company, she hears daily from clients who cannot meet their payments because of layoffs and says she wonders why Mr. Bush is not talking more about that.

She does not have to go far to find a debate. Her friend and co-worker Kim Smith, 35, agrees that the economy is troubled, but unlike Ms. Larkin, she said she believes taking immediate action against Iraq is necessary to finish a job left undone by the Persian Gulf war. ''If we had done our job then, would we be where we are now?'' Ms. Smith asked.

In places far from Washington's increasingly partisan war debate, Iraq is on the minds of ordinary people. The results of dozens of interviews conducted this week across the country suggest that the Bush administration is succeeding in focusing public attention on Iraq, though the president's election-year call for war is also raising anxiety and fear, even among many people who agree with him.

The ailing economy, which Democrats believe is a potent issue in their quest to take control of Congress, was regarded by many people as a subject interwoven with the Iraq debate. Some people worried that a war could further destabilize the stock market, but others countered that past wars had resuscitated the economy. Many people agreed that the likelihood of war was one more factor leaving investors skittish.

''A new part of my business is fear management, and Iraq comes up a lot,'' said Michael Johnson, 24, an investment adviser who was buying a sandwich in downtown Denver today as antiwar protesters and bystanders awaited the arrival of Mr. Bush at a Republican campaign rally. ''My business used to involve telling people how best to invest their money, and now that's secondary to taking fear out of investing.''

The sense of fear also extended beyond the economy, as some people groping with the uncertainties of the world after Sept. 11 expressed doubts about whether the country could emerge from Iraq with a clean victory, despite the military's technological prowess. ''My biggest concern is that we won't be successful,'' said Paul Foltz, 49, who lives in Indiana but works in downtown Chicago.

''We already proved that when we did it in the past,'' he said, drawing comparisons with the earlier war against Iraq and its president, Saddam Hussein. ''Once again we'll end up bombing children's hospitals, and he'll still end up getting away.''

But Mr. Bush's resolve in pushing for action appealed to many people, including some Democrats who had voted for Al Gore in the 2000 presidential election. Dan Ernst, 30, a graduate student who lives in Brookline, Mass., said efforts by Mr. Hussein to acquire nuclear weapons and circumvent international scrutiny more than justified action to remove him.

Mr. Ernst said politicians should have a healthy debate, but he said he was disappointed in Mr. Gore's speech this week criticizing Mr. Bush's Iraq policy.

''Gore revealed himself as a disappointment, an opportunist willing to put the world's interest at stake for his own political existence,'' Mr. Ernst said. ''I think he's just creating an opposing viewpoint so he doesn't fade out of the political scene. It's sad to me, and I voted for Gore.''

Here in Ottawa County, along the borders of Kansas and Missouri in roughly the geographic center of the country, voters divided almost evenly in 2000 between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, with Mr. Gore carrying the county by a fraction of a percentage point. Interviews along aging Main Street in Miami (pronounced my-AM-uh) elicited a range of opinion, from steadfast support for military action to outright opposition. Some people accused the president of escalating war talk as an election-year distraction from the ailing economy. Others said the United States must remove Mr. Hussein to ensure security in the future.

The talk, though, was often more personal than partisan. Patty Rose, 47, a legal secretary, said that she did not want a war with Iraq, and that the Mr. Bush should continue to focus on Al Qaeda. Three of her children are in the military, including a 26-year-old daughter who is an Air Force sergeant just returned from three months in Afghanistan and the Middle East. Mrs. Rose worries about what would happen to her 5-year-old granddaughter if her mother returned to the Middle East for war and did not come back.

''I just worry about her all the time,'' Mrs. Rose said of her granddaughter.

Mrs. Rose's boss, Richard D. James, 43, staunchly supports action against Iraq, even though he admits he worries about his own two sons, ages 19 and 22, and the possibility that the draft may be reinstated or that they may enlist.

''I think there is a generation that believes that a war will be fought with push buttons and bombs dropped from airplanes and that there won't be a need for 18-year-old ground troops,'' said Mr. James, a lawyer and a Republican. ''I disagree with that. I think it will be fought with 18-year-old kids with rifles with knives on the ends of them.''

Still, Mr. James said delaying action against Mr. Hussein would solve nothing. ''The timing is never right,'' he said. ''What will they accomplish if we wait? If we wait five more years in the future, he's got a better ability to defend himself, and it's some other dad with infantry-age sons.''

Once a manufacturing hub, Ottawa County has one of the state's highest unemployment rates, which has left some people here resentful.

''Everybody is broke and getting broker,'' said Jerry Orcutt, 65, who operates a store, Discount Jewelry. ''People come in here all the time, and they haven't got $20. They want to sell their coins or their rings so they can get their diaper money or gas money.''

Mr. Orcutt predicted that an Iraqi war would spike gasoline prices and further harm the economy. ''Now those big shots who want to go to war, they should go over there and shoot,'' he said. ''But they send the little guy.''

Brent Brassfield, 44, a district manager for a shoe store chain, agreed. ''I feel like the middle class built this country, does most of the work, pays most of the taxes -- and there seems to be no relief for the middle class,'' he said.

Of the president, Mr. Brassfield, a Democrat, added, ''You wouldn't see him so anxious to go to war if the economy was better.''

A few doors away at a bookstore and coffee shop with no customers inside, Lynn Walsh, 42, who voted for Mr. Bush, conceded that she did not follow the fine points of the political debate that closely. She is one of about 20 women who formed an investment club three years ago and have seen their original $11,000 stake halved by the stock market slide, yet she said she remained optimistic about the economy. What worries her, though, is the prospect of a war, which she said makes her ''heartsick.''

Ms. Walsh said she and her husband have lately been reading Civil War history, including tales of the march of General Sherman through the South. She recalled a passage about Sherman imploring his men to fight, saying, ''Charge, men, charge, for God's sake, charge.''

''This is how many years ago?'' Ms. Walsh said. ''And here is Bush pretty much saying the same thing: Go and charge men, charge.''
