
THREATS AND RESPONSES: MOOD OF IRAQ; As Baghdad Empties, Hussein Is Defiant
By John F. Burns
March 19, 2003

As the streets of the Iraqi capital emptied today in expectation of war, President Saddam Hussein gave a defiant rebuff to President Bush's ''despicable and reckless ultimatum'' giving the Iraqi leader and his two sons until Wednesday to quit Iraq.

At a series of top-level meetings, the 65-year-old Mr. Hussein rejected outright the ultimatum given by Mr. Bush on Monday night, and added a warning to the ''American, English and Zionist invading aggressors'' that they faced defeat.

Using the Islamic references and the anti-Israeli virulence that have been a dominant feature of his recent speeches, he predicted a ''holy war'' that would ''wipe out the ranks'' of invading American troops.

As Mr. Hussein spoke, thousands of families either hunkered down at home with stores of canned food and other war supplies, or headed out to towns and villages far from Baghdad, which most Iraqis believe will quickly become Mr. Hussein's last bastion after 23 years in power.

The city was eerily empty, but at major government buildings, including one headquarters for the secret police and the information ministry, workers loaded computers and filing cabinets on trucks. Officials said the move was to allow for work to continue at other locations during American attacks.

By staying in Baghdad, or perhaps hiding in one of the palace complexes with a vast network of tunnels and bunkers that he has built elsewhere in Iraq, Mr. Hussein appeared to set the stage for a situation similar to that which confronted Hitler in 1945, when the might of the Soviet Army bore down on the German dictator in a bunker near the Reichstag in Berlin, provoking his suicide.

Iraqis have long said that Mr. Hussein's messianic complex about his role in history would not allow him to accept the humiliation of fleeing abroad.

Accordingly, Mr. Hussein announced his decision today from what appeared, on Iraq's state-controlled television, to be an underground bunker -- a windowless conference room, with white marble walls and floors and a low ceiling.

With Mr. Hussein's obsessive secrecy about his movements heightened by the certainty that American surveillance satellites are seeking to track any sign of his movements, official accounts did not say where he held the meetings with other leaders at which he rejected the demand for him and his two sons, Uday and Qusay, to leave Iraq.

Wearing a field marshal's uniform with a pistol loosely holstered at his right hip, the Iraqi president appeared with the handpicked political and military leaders who form his inner circle. In passages shown later on television, he was a picture of smiling geniality, accepting prolonged applause as he entered the conference room, then leaning back with total self-assurance and ease as others ran through briefings.

The atmosphere appeared to be one of complete, unquestioning subservience to Mr. Hussein, of a kind rarely seen since the era of Hitler, Stalin and Mao. But what was left open was how far this subservience still extends among the 24 million Iraqis.

Some part of the answer came from those who stayed up into the predawn hours of Tuesday to listen to shortwave radio relays of Mr. Bush's speech setting the ultimatum, then set out to ask foreigners when an American attack would begin.

The striking thing was that for many Iraqis the first American strike could not come too soon.

In part, this appeared to reflect a yearning for closure among a people who have lived on their nerves for months, as the prospect of a new war loomed. Among many Iraqis, the mood for some time has seemed to be that war, if it is inevitable, might as well come soon as late, so the country can move forward into whatever future the conflict determines.

Many seemed ready to endure American air attacks and the armored thrusts that are expected to follow them if the outcome is a new Iraq that brings freedom from the long history of repression here.

For months before Mr. Bush's ultimatum, Arab leaders had been floating the idea that Mr. Hussein might accept exile rather than war, perhaps in Libya or Saudi Arabia. Mr. Hussein always scoffed.

Today, he was defiant. ''Let these discredited people know that Iraq does not set its course on orders from a foreigner, or choose its leadership in accordance with instructions coming from Washington, London and Tel Aviv, but solely in accord with the wishes of the people of Iraq,'' an official Iraqi News Agency summary said. ''In dealing with Iraq, they should learn to behave with respect, or they will repent.''.

''Iraq with all its sons is fully ready to face the invaders and defeat them and hoist high the banner of 'God is great,' '' the agency added.

Mr. Hussein's meetings seemed hastily staged to respond to Mr. Bush's ultimatum. First, he met with the ruling oligarchy -- the Revolutionary Command Council and top leaders of the ruling Baath Party. Next, he led a cabinet meeting. Finally, he met his war council, including Qusay, his younger son, whom he has selected to lead the Baghdad military district, and Iraq's other top military commanders.

Reports on the meetings took the form of exhortations from Mr. Hussein, mostly in the form of the cataclysmic rhetoric that he has long favored. To some Iraqis who listened to the broadcasts, the emphasis on polemics appeared to confirm what observations about Baghdad have suggested: that the Iraqi forces have done surprisingly little in the way of preparing the capital's defenses.

Just as he prepared Iraqis for war in 1991 by calling it ''The Mother of All Battles,'' Mr. Hussein told them that ''this will be Iraq's last great battle with the malicious tyrant in our time, and America's last great war of aggression, too.''

Eager to stir support for Iraq across the Arab and Muslim world, he invoked the image of a holy war, and of himself as ''a jihadist,'' or holy warrior. To the generals, he described war with the United States as ''the decisive battle between the army of faith, right and justice, and the forces of tyranny and American-Zionist savagery on the other.''

Men like Izzat Ibrahim and Taha Yassin Ramadan, the second- and third-ranking figures in the hierarchy, as well as Tariq Aziz, a deputy prime minister, all in the green military-style uniforms of the Baath Party, led other officials in what amounted to an elaborate ritual of fealty. Television showed virtually every man -- and the one woman -- present laughing when Mr. Hussein laughed, and leaning forward attentively, pens poised above notepads, when he turned serious.

Another shot of Qusay Saddam Hussein seated at his father's immediate right at the meeting of top military commanders confirmed that Qusay, 36, has established a dominance similar to his father's.

At one point, as Saddam Hussein spoke, the younger Mr. Hussein turned abruptly to a general and motioned impatiently with his pen for the officer, a man in his late 50's, to take notes.

The glimpses suggested how improbable is another outcome that Mr. Bush has said would avoid a war -- an assassination of Mr. Hussein by insiders, or a military coup.

During the day, Mr. Hussein's government organized new demonstrations of loyalty, beginning with a predawn rally in Baghdad at which men of every age from their teens to 60's volunteered to serve as ''fedayeen,'' or soldiers ready to sacrifice themselves to God.

''Saddam, Saddam, we pledge our blood and soul to you!'' the crowds shouted.

But in quieter moments today, other Iraqis were astonishingly frank in suggesting they were ready to endure war for liberty.

One retired chemical engineer working as a taxi driver told a fare that he had listened to Mr. Bush. ''People are waiting for America,'' he said, taking both hands off the wheel to simulate applause.

This sudden candor has been a phenomenon starkly out of character with the neo-Stalinist atmosphere that has prevailed for so long in Iraq.
