THREATS AND RESPONSES: SOCIETY; Iraq Arms Quest Uncovers a Zest for Drink
By John F. Burns
Dec. 7, 2002


When Dr. Hussein al-Duremi went with his friends to the Tiger Eye liquor store on the 14th of Ramadan Street today, they had a good laugh with a fellow Iraqi customer called Wali about the United Nations weapons inspectors who went looking for nuclear bombs this week in three gin factories outside Baghdad.

''It's not an atomic bomb they're putting in there is it, Wali?'' one shopper asked as a $21 bottle of Johnnie Walker Black Label whiskey was slipped into a brown paper bag, the totem of a liquor trade that thrives here as in no other Arab country.

Wali, a 24-year-old electrical engineer, chuckled, as have many Iraqis since learning about the strange business of the nuclear detectives in the booze plant.

In Iraq, drinking alcohol is about as common as brushing teeth. But the way it is consumed reflects the shifts in Saddam Hussein's rule. Since he proclaimed a ''faith'' campaign in 1996, abandoning a secular model for one more influenced by Islam, alcohol has lived in a twilight zone.

Drinking in public is banned, and the English-style pubs that used to line Al Nidal Street in the center of Baghdad, a legacy of Britain's colonial role here up to 1932, have closed. Now, Iraqis drink at home, or in restaurants and nightclubs furtive enough to serve alcohol in frosted glasses.

The visits to the liquor factories may have been a bust for the inspectors, but -- with the whole Muslim world following the crisis here -- their timing was a gift for Mr. Hussein. The plants were added to the checklist of inspection sites along with one presidential palace, which assured that Iraqi invective focused on the ''indignity'' inflicted by the palace search, and not the oddity of the gin plants.

But privately, Iraqi officials were delighted with the plant inspections. ''Would you like to search my toothpaste tube?'' one official said. ''You never know what you might find in there.''

The joking about nuclear weapons is part of the atmosphere at the Tiger Eye, the Tiffany's of Baghdad liquor stores. The dazzlingly lit shop greets customers with gunmetal gray display shelves from Scandinavia, bearing more than 100 brands of whiskey; more than 50 varieties of gin, and as many of vodka; and racks of wines from France, Italy, Spain, Germany and Bulgaria.

There are also bottles of locally distilled gin at $1.22 apiece, and of local firewater called arak, at 73 cents. Plants manufacturing every kind of alcohol have existed here for decades, and bottle stores also offer locally distilled whiskey, vodka and other spirits, as well as cognac.

Many of the Iraqi brands are brazen knockoffs of Western varieties, with labels like ''Creme de Mint'' and, in the case of one bottle found by a reporter last year, ''J.&B. Haig Walker.''

For the folks at Tiger Eye, the last couple of days have been a bonanza. It is the Middle East's equivalent of Christmas -- the Id al-Fitr holiday, which marks the end of the fasting month of Ramadan. Men like Dr. Duremi and his friends have been stocking up for their parties, which have been taking place, more than usually, in the quirky atmosphere of hope and fear that characterizes life in Mr. Hussein's Iraq.

War may be just around the corner, and so may the end of a ruthless political system that is all many Iraqis have ever known. But for now, Mr. Hussein and his Revolutionary Command Council are still solidly in their palaces.

One palliative, as in any society under stress, is alcohol. Iraq publishes no statistics on the subject, but at least anecdotally, drinking has followed the rising trend of anxiety in a country that has staggered from crisis to crisis under Mr. Hussein.

In the luxurious private homes in Baghdad districts like Karada and Mansour, where late-model Mercedes are parked in the driveways and curved-walled swimming pools hide behind the palm trees and roof-high walls, glass wall cabinets are stocked with the best of imported spirits and wines.

In Saddam City, a desolate, sprawling district on the outskirts that is home to two million of Iraq's poorest people, there is hardly a home, however deprived, that has no arak tucked away.

Tales abound of privileged places gripped by violence that started with heavy drinking and ended with smoking guns.

One feature of the Iraqi liquor business is that it is mostly, for historical reasons, a Christian preserve. Since Ottoman times hundreds of years ago, when the ruling sultans were Muslims but Christianity and other religions existed side by side with Islam, only members of Iraq's small Christian community, mostly ethnic Assyrians, Armenians, Chaldeans and Yazidis, have been allowed to sell liquor. At distilleries, almost all the managers and workers are Christians, too.

One reason Mr. Hussein has allowed the liquor industry to continue, which would be unthinkable in a conservative Islamic country like Saudi Arabia or Yemen, is that he owes his power, nominally at least, to his position as leader of the secularist Arab Baath Socialist Party, which seized control in 1963.

In the 1970's and 80's, Iraq under the Baath became the most secular of all Arab countries. One result was women's emancipation -- still one of Iraq's most striking features. Another is the free availability of liquor, a refreshing break from the hypocrisies about alcohol that are common in much of the rest of the Muslim world.

But, as Mr. Hussein said in a speech about the weapons inspectors on Thursday, ''For every situation there is an answer, for every phase there is a certain behavior.'' Pragmatism is everything in Arab politics.

After his defeat in the Persian Gulf war in 1991, he was an isolated figure, no longer credible as a pretender to the leadership of the Arab world. His 1996 ''iman'' campaign -- the word means faith in Arabic -- was one response. He began showing up more regularly at mosques and suffusing his speeches with Koranic references, and in the late 1990's he ordered the construction of two new Baghdad mosques that are to be the biggest in the Islamic world, one to be named after himself.

Deviations from Islamic social norms also caught his eye. According to Western human rights reports, one result of the faith campaign that has gained increasing momentum in the last year has involved the arrest and summary execution of prostitutes, some of them by sword.

The 1996 ban on drinking in public places was another result. Iraqis say its most obvious effect, apart from the closure of bars and pubs, has been the proliferation of speakeasies and a sharp rise in drinking at home.

The Tiger Eye was founded after the 1996 ban and moved to its present location two years ago amid the boom in sales. Most customers, predictably, said they supported Mr. Hussein's decision to curb public drinking. But it wasn't long before some of them, moving behind the liquor racks to find the privacy they needed to speak more candidly, said the faith campaign had made deep inroads into their ration of fun.

One man said he used to go to an old British-built racetrack called the Prancing Horse to place illicit bets, and then celebrate his victories, or mourn his losses, with a fifth of arak he kept in his pocket. But the racetrack went when the site was bulldozed to make way for the new Saddam mosque.

These days some of Baghdad's most popular drinking places, apart from the speakeasies, are those that sell a brew that Iraqis know as pacha. With a history going back to Ottoman times, pacha comes from boiling goat's heads until the bones dissolve into a creamy broth.

According to the legend among hard-drinking Iraqis, a glass or two of pacha, after a night on the bottle, will cure the most stubborn hangover.

It is nonalcoholic, and sales are said to be better than ever.
