
THREATS AND RESPONSES: PERSPECTIVES; Powell Defends A First Strike As Iraq Option
By James Dao
Sept. 8, 2002


Secretary of State Colin L. Powell defended President Bush's policy of pre-emption against countries that threatened the United States and in an interview on Friday played down talk of tensions with American allies in Europe as squabbling among friends.

At a time when the Bush administration has begun making the case to foreign leaders for ousting President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, Secretary Powell argues that the United States has been unfairly characterized as unilateralist and opposed to treaties.

Secretary Powell, in the interview aboard his plane on his way back from Africa, said that he disagreed that the president's embrace of the idea of pre-emptive strikes against enemy threats was a departure from traditional policy.

''Pre-emption has always been available as a tool of foreign policy or military doctrine,'' he said.

He noted, however, that since Sept. 11 the policy of pre-emption -- or prevention, as he sometimes calls it -- has ''risen in the hierarchy of options a bit'' because of the devastating threats posed by terrorists. [Excerpts, Page 26.]

''It is an option that is available to a president or to a leader,'' he said. ''It must be used with great care and judiciousness and with a clear understanding of the obligations that we have as a responsible member of the international community.''

Secretary Powell looked characteristically confident as he prepared for a new round of diplomacy aimed at driving out Mr. Hussein.

He said he did not feel isolated within the administration and had not been the target of criticism by more hawkish cabinet colleagues for encouraging President Bush to build international support for the campaign against terrorism.

''I get all the support that I need from my colleagues in the administration, and I certainly get all the support I need from the president,'' he said.

Secretary Powell has differed with others in the administration on many issues, often quite visibly, and those splits have become part of the debate over confronting Iraq. He acknowledges the differences and in recent days has tried to smooth them over. ''Some are real, some are perceived, some are overhyped,'' he said.

To convince the American public and the international community that the campaign against terrorism must be sustained, Secretary Powell said the administration would argue that the United States is engaged in a ''different kind of war'' against an enemy that will not be vanquished with ''one Tomahawk strike or one battle.''

''It may be a war of diplomacy as we get friends who rally to the campaign, to make sure they stay with it,'' he said. ''It may be a war of politics, where you make sure people understand in other countries that if you want to be part of this great coalition, it may cost you politically, but we are expecting you to do that.''

''We are paying occasionally a political price to do what we think is right, and we hope that you will do the same thing.''

Secretary Powell, who served as President Reagan's national security adviser and as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under the first President Bush, said his government experiences were like bookends for two major events: the end of the cold war and the start of the campaign against terrorism.

Sept. 11 changed the nature of American diplomacy, he said, by showing the need ''to break the old model of super-power conflict, where everything was measured against this chess board of the red side of the map and the blue side of the map, Communism versus democracy.''

He said the terrorist attacks shattered cold-war assumptions about America's relations with China and Russia, opening the door to cooperation among the nuclear rivals against a shared enemy: stateless terrorists who are seeking their own biological and nuclear weapons.

''Here was something that had nothing to do with any of the old cold-war models,'' he said. ''Here was an enemy that affected us all. And it was something that everybody could join in against.''

This mutual enemy made it easier for President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to accept the United States' withdrawal from the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty, Secretary Powell said. It also allowed Washington to repair relations rapidly with Beijing after a Chinese fighter jet collided with an American surveillance plane off China last year.

''Everybody thought: 'Oh dear, this is going to throw the whole relationship into the ditch,' '' he said. ''But within 10 days, we had figured out a way to get out of that problem. And the reason for that is that both sides, both the Chinese and the United States, realize that as serious as that was as an incident, it could not be allowed to derail an important relationship.''

By contrast, many diplomats feel the trans-Atlantic relationship is deteriorating amid anger with the Bush administration for opposing the International Criminal Court and other treaties that are popular in Europe.

But Secretary Powell insisted that such tensions were not new and did not threaten the United States alliance with Europe.

''I have never known a period even in that 15 years, or even before in my experience, where there weren't some tensions between the United States and Europe,'' he said.

''You can also just look within Europe and you can find significant differences between the nations of Europe,'' he added. ''But no one accuses France of being unilateral if it disagrees with other countries in Europe on a particular issue.''

He argued that criticisms of the Bush administration's foreign policies were often based on the faulty assumption that Washington disliked working in coalitions.

''People do often jump to the conclusion that because there's a disagreement, that we don't care about our friends and allies,'' he said. ''We certainly do.''

He also played down reports of a rift between himself and Mr. Bush's other senior foreign policy advisers, particularly Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld. They do not always favor unilateral action, he said, and he does not always oppose it.

In Africa, several foreign ministers complained about the briefness of his visit: two working days in three countries. But he said the terrorism concerns had not caused the State Department to lose sight of issues like the Middle East, human rights, H.I.V./AIDS and trade.

Addressing criticism of America as a global bully, he said: ''Our record and our history is not one of going out looking for conflict, it is not one of undertaking pre-emptive acts for the purpose of seizing another person's territory, another people's territory, or to impose our will on someone else. Our history and our tradition is always one of defending our interest.''

But in a clear reference to the possibility of attacking Iraq, he defended the policy of pre-emptive action.

''Sometimes, if we can defend those interests even before most of the world recognizes those interests are being threatened,'' he said, ''then I think it is a tool that should be available to the president.''

Blending Diplomacy and Military Discipline

EARLY YEARS: Born New York City, April 5, 1937; B.S. City College of New York, 1958; commissioned as second lieutenant, Army, 1958; M.B.A. George Washington University, 1971.

PUBLIC CAREER: Professional soldier for 35 years, rising to four-star general. National Security Adviser 1987-89; Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff 1989-93.

PRIVATE SECTOR CAREER: Public speaker; corporate director; chairman of Americas Promise The Alliance for Youth.

POLITICAL DOSSIER: Frequently courted as a presidential candidate by both parties, he seriously considered a run for the White House in 1996, then abandoned it. Supports a strong military but is cautious about using military force, criticizes big government but supports abortion rights, believes Republicans have not been inclusive enough toward racial minorities.

STYLE: Down-to-earth and easygoing in public; sometimes quick-tempered in private. Card-catalog memory and penchant for telling stories. Well liked as a boss.

QUOTES: ''It ain't as bad as you think. It will look better in the morning.''

HIS FUTURE: Only his wife knows for sure.
