
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; BLAIR IS CONFIDENT OF TOUGH U.N. LINE ON IRAQI WEAPONS
By Warren Hoge
Sept. 30, 2002

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain expressed confidence today of securing United Nations approval for a tough new Security Council resolution on Iraqi weapons, and he asserted that Saddam Hussein would be disarmed, one way or another.

''I hope he can be forced by international pressure, but if not, we have to be prepared, as an international community, to force him to do it the other way,'' Mr. Blair said.

He made his remarks in a BBC interview with David Frost at the opening of the Labor Party conference in Blackpool, England, which is expected to challenge him over his war stance.

Mr. Blair refused to rule out acting along with the United States if the United Nations failed to endorse military strikes against Iraq. He said, ''The most important thing, if we want to avoid conflict, is to maintain the maximum pressure on Saddam and the Iraqi regime.''

Many in his party are critical of his closeness to President Bush and opposed to Britain making any military move without United Nations approval, and they were encouraged by the turnout of 150,000 protesters who staged an antiwar march in London on Saturday.

Mr. Blair was speaking as Britain and the United States continued a diplomatic effort to get France, Russia and China, the other three veto-holding members of the Security Council, to support the draft resolution that would reportedly give the Iraqis 7 days to accept the terms for the re-entry of inspectors and a further 23 days to declare the extent of their arsenal of weapons of mass destruction.

It also is thought to call for a protection force for the arms experts, insist on access to all presidential palaces and other sites that have been off limits to past inspection teams, and to prescribe ''all necessary means'' -- a diplomatic term for military force -- as punishment for noncompliance.

In his customary role of intermediary between Europe and the United States, Mr. Blair signaled that London might be willing to soften the terms of the draft now being circulated in Paris and Moscow. He noted in particular France's proposal for two separate Security Council resolutions, with only the second threatening the use of force.

''We can leave that open for the moment,'' he said. ''There are a lot of questions about do you go back to the U.N. at a later stage. Let's take it step by step.''

Suggesting there also might be some flexibility in settling on the final terms, he said, ''It is probably not quite as definite as it might appear from some of the papers.''

In Moscow, Marc Grossman, the United States assistant secretary of state for political affairs, and his British Foreign Office counterpart, Peter Ricketts, appeared to have failed to gain Russian acceptance of the draft text a day after encountering similar reservations from the French government in Paris.

A British envoy, William Ehrman, the deputy undersecretary of state for defense and international security, arrived in Beijing for meetings on Monday with Chinese officials, who have also voiced skepticism.

Russian news agencies quoted informed sources as saying that Russia was unhappy with the resolution, which one official dismissed as ''by its very nature, not fulfillable.''

Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov made no comment on the talks but restated the Russian position favoring the fastest possible return to Iraq of inspectors, without the need for any new Security Council resolution.

The topic of Iraq will come up in Moscow again on Monday when Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel meets with the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin. Planned several months ago, Mr. Sharon's visit takes on new significance now with the quickening pace of diplomacy over Iraq.

In Vienna, Hans Blix, the United Nations chief weapons inspector, and officials from the International Atomic Energy Agency met today to prepare for three days of talks with Iraqi officials on details of their planned return to Baghdad after nearly a four-year break. Inspectors left Iraq in December 1998 on the eve of United States and British bombing raids meant to punish Baghdad for not cooperating with them.

The talks are the first test of Iraq's willingness to cooperate since the country's foreign minister, Naji Sabri, sent a letter to Secretary General Kofi Annan on Sept. 16 saying the inspectors could return without preconditions.

Mr. Blix said he would have nothing to say until the talks ended at midweek. Melissa Fleming, spokeswoman for the agency, said that talks were ''purely technical. We'll be laying on the table what we need.''

Iraq said that American warplanes had raided the civilian airport in the southern city of Basra this morning for the second time in a week, bombing its radar systems and passenger terminals.

But in Tampa, Fla., the United States Central Command said the planes had used precision-guided weapons to strike a military mobile radar at Basra and a surface-to-air missile site near Qalat Sikur.

A spokesman, Maj. Bill Harrison, said the strikes were in response to ''Iraqi hostile acts.''

The raids took place at a time when three Democratic Congressmen were visiting Basra to assess Iraqi civilian needs.

None of the three, Representatives Jim McDermott of Washington, David E. Bonior of Michigan and Mike Thompson of California, mentioned having witnessed the strikes, which occurred six hours before they passed through the airport on their return trip to Baghdad.

In a broadcast from the Iraqi capital, Mr. Bonior and Mr. McDermott said on the ABC News program ''This Week'' that officials had assured them they would allow the inspectors the freedom to conduct their searches.
''Let the U.N. inspectors do their job,'' Mr. Bonior said, explaining that officials had promised ''unrestricted, unfettered'' access, though they wanted ''their sovereignty respected.

''They don't want to be having knocked on the door during prayer and say, 'Open up this building in five minutes.' They want to be treated with some dignity and respect. But basically they're suggesting that everything will be open.''

On Saturday, Iraq had said it would permit inspectors only under terms of previous United Nations resolutions, suggesting that the weapons experts would not have access to presidential palaces and other such sites.

The new draft resolution reportedly overrules these considerations and insists on unrestricted access.

The Democrats' comments were dismissed by the Senate's second-ranking Republican, Don Nickles of Oklahoma, who called it ''counterproductive'' to ''undermine'' Mr. Bush at a time when he is seeking support from allies.

Nebraska Republican Chuck Hagel, a Vietnam War veteran and member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee who has urged Mr. Bush to try to build the kind of coalition the United States did in the Persian Gulf war with Iraq in 1991, said the current effort to gain support was showing the way toward a resolution of the crisis, even if it ended in war.

Speaking on ''Fox News Sunday,'' he said: ''I think if we run the diplomatic track, as we are now, and in the end we cannot get a Security Council resolution, then the United States has exhausted all the means , diplomatic means and channels, and then we'll make a call. And if, in fact, we find at the end of the day that the Brits, and the Turks and others are with us, then we'll have the option to do that.''

This week, the lawmakers will be debating the language of a draft Congressional resolution being sought by Mr. Bush to give him the authority to ''use all means'' to disarm Iraq, which the Americans and British accuse of developing weapons of mass destruction.

Addressing that on CNN's ''Late Edition,'' Senator John McCain of Arizona, a senior Republican on the Armed Services Committee, said, ''I believe you will see, at the end of this coming week or early in the next week, an overwhelming majority support vote, in both houses of Congress, to support the president if we have to go in and orchestrate a regime change militarily.''
