
A NATION AT WAR: TROOPS; G.I.'s and Marines See Little Iraqi Resistance
By Steven Lee Myers
March 21, 2003

The desert is strewn with broken hulks of tanks and trucks, half buried in sand, the detritus of the Persian Gulf war of 12 years ago. Now, not far inside Iraq, the destruction from the new war is already apparent.

Two Iraqi border posts lay in twisted ruins, destroyed by a shuddering barrage of artillery fire from the Kuwaiti side as the Army's Third Infantry Division, thrusting to the west of American marines and British forces, opened a ground campaign intended to help drive Saddam Hussein from power.

Farther north, the charred shell of an Iraqi command post continued to burn early this morning, casting an eerie glow through the silver, sand-screened moonlight. As the first of some 20,000 soldiers from the Third Division poured across the border, Iraqi resistance was light.

A tank and three Bradley fighting vehicles attacked the compound earlier Thursday evening. Three Iraqis died in a truck inside, the first confirmed casualties of the Army's campaign. The first two border posts turned out to be empty, their soldiers having fled.

American soldiers gathered the dead, placing the bodies in black bags and leaving them beside the road before moving on. They also collected the dead soldiers' belongings, one officer said, so that word could be passed to their families.

The first tank platoon of Charlie Company encountered and destroyed two Iraqi T-72 tanks. ''I came up over a ridge and saw a T-72 and fired,'' said Sgt. Melvin L. Green. ''I saw the turret pop off. My wing man hit the other.''

There were no immediate reports of any American casualties along the desert frontier, producing a swelling of relief and jubilation at the point of farthest advance early today. (Guidelines imposed on journalists traveling with the military prohibit reporting on many details of operations, including locations.)

''Honestly, I never thought I'd be back,'' said Maj. Michael D. Oliver, the operations officer of the Third Battalion, 69th Armored, who fought in the 1991 gulf war and whose companies led the breach across the border in this one.

By early today, with holes in the fences and berms that once separated Kuwait and Iraq, thousands of American soldiers crossed a wide swath of the border in what commanders called an efficient, successful operation.

Those crossing included marines from the First Marine Division, who entered Iraq after a barrage of artillery fire, much of which was directed at Safwan Hill, the only elevated terrain in the flat, barren desert on either side of the border. The 444-foot-high hill housed an Iraqi Army observation post, backed by dug-in infantry troops, and provided the Iraqis the only vantage point over the Marine positions.

Two hours later elements of two of the First Marine Division's combat teams crossed into Iraq at a number of points, Marine officers said. The teams consisted of infantry in amphibious tracked vehicles armed with automatic grenade launchers and .50-caliber machine guns, backed by M1A1 Abrams battle tanks and armored bulldozers.

The Third Division's ground attack began at 6:15 p.m. local time (10:15 a.m., Eastern time), 24 hours ahead of schedule, after the cruise missile attack on Baghdad the night before, and following four Iraqi missile attacks into Kuwait on Thursday. The Army's Patriot missile batteries, attached to the Third Division, shot down two of those, including one close to the division's Second Brigade.

''If anything, we'll be moving faster rather than slower,'' Col. William F. Grimsley, the commander of the Third Division's First Brigade, which led the operation to breach the border, told his battalion commanders as the attack neared.

The opening of the ground campaign bore little resemblance to the 1991 war, when bombers and jets pounded Iraq for weeks before American-led forces swept into Kuwait and Iraq.

One soldier, with the 11th Engineers, shouted at an officer that the first he heard of fighter jets overhead was a radio report that one intended to strike the sector he was already in. Aircraft passed overhead only sporadically through the night, and then were detectable only as low, far-off roars.

The Third Division's attack -- only a prelude to what commanders and soldiers expect to be more intense battles ahead -- began with a barrage of ATACMS missiles, which have a range of 180 miles and were most likely intended for targets well inside Iraq, not along the border.

The missile's rockets rose through the dark like white comets slowly streaking through the sky, prompting whoops from soldiers waiting to cross, as well as more solemn reflection of what was ahead.

''It hit me when I saw the missiles,'' said Second Lt. Peter A. Ricci of San Diego, who graduated from West Point only last June and found himself in combat more quickly than he had imagined. ''Man, it's the real deal. If you don't have fears, you're not human.''

At 8 p.m., Paladin artillery batteries thundered in loud, reverberating claps across the frontier, but passed as quickly as a thunderstorm, signaling the start of the thrust north 10 minutes after the barrage began.

For weeks, the Third Division had planned and trained to cross the border -- cleaved by two rows of tank ditches and 12-foot sand berms and lined by an electrified fence -- using armored bulldozers to punch ''lanes'' across what was a demilitarized zone patrolled by United Nations military observers until last week, when they withdrew.

Kuwaiti engineers had already cut paths through the barriers on their side of the zone, and after President Bush spoke by telephone to the Emir of Kuwait, they agreed Wednesday to clear the last berm at, but not over, the border.

''Everything was open before we got there,'' said Staff Sgt. Dennis S. Kradle, part of the 11th Engineering Brigade, whose job was significantly eased.

Air Force jets have dropped thousands of leaflets urging regular Iraqi Army soldiers to surrender rather than defend Mr. Hussein. Here on the battlefield, that sentiment took the form of a Humvee, mounted with a large loudspeaker, that blasted five-minute messages every half hour before the attack began.

Some soldiers felt little solace at the ease of the first fight.

''This was the easiest part -- going into Iraq,'' said Staff Sgt. James M. Currence, a tank commander with the Third Battalion. ''It's going to get a lot tougher.''

For the marines, events moved rapidly as the night wore on, with more troops pouring over the border. By early today, the bulk of the forces had crossed, and as the sun rose, tank after tank and Bradley after Bradley passed by in endless columns.

Sergeants told the marines to dig sleeping holes and rest wearing their chemical warfare suits and their boots, ready to move forward at short notice.

The marines' attack began with 155-millimeter howitzer fire at 6:25 p.m. as dozens of Super Cobra helicopter gunships rattled toward their targets. The artillery barrage was aimed at the Iraqi Army's 51st Mechanized Division, which held the border area where the marines were planning to cross. Initial reports described the Iraqi resistance as light.

But the marines also said they hoped to ''bypass'' as many Iraqi Army units as possible on their drive toward Baghdad, roughly 300 miles north, and were hoping many Iraqi units would surrender as they did in the 1991 war.

Earlier Thursday, a Marine patrol of light armored reconnaissance vehicles just south of the border encountered two Iraqi armored personnel carriers on the other side. The marines fired on them with machine guns and missiles, destroying both.

The First Marine Division moved some 20,000 troops north overnight in a large convoy. As they set up their base today, the marines repeatedly responded to shouts of ''gas-gas-gas'' by putting on their masks. At one point, they went to a Stage 4 alert, which meant dressing in full chemical weapons uniform -- masks, clothing, boots and gloves -- in considerable haste.
