
THREATS AND RESPONSES: WHITE HOUSE MEMO; Amid Doubts on Iraq and the Economy, Bush Seeks to Regain Center Stage
By Richard W. Stevenson
Jan. 26, 2003

Standing before a teleprompter and a small group of aides in the White House theater on Friday, President Bush began rehearsing the words that represent his best shot at uniting the country behind him as he confronts war and a stubbornly weak economy.

White House officials said Mr. Bush's State of the Union address on Tuesday night should last less than an hour. It may be a little longer than last year's 50 minutes, they said, but it will still be relatively short, given the magnitude of the issues and the challenge he faces in rallying support at home and abroad and strengthening his own political position.

''This is basically his moment to jump back into center stage and say, 'I'm the 900-pound gorilla, and I'm a man with a plan,' '' said Dick Armey, the former House Republican leader, who noted that the Democratic presidential prospects had grabbed considerable public attention over the last several weeks. ''He'll say, 'I know what needs to be done and I'm going to get it done.' ''

The coming week may be a turning point in determining whether and when the United States will lead an invasion of Iraq, and will be another in a series that will define Mr. Bush for history.

On Monday, the United Nations weapons inspectors are to submit their report on Iraq to the Security Council. Mr. Bush's speech on Tuesday night will be followed on Wednesday by a traditional trip -- this year to the electorally critical battleground of Michigan -- to sell his domestic agenda. As Mr. Bush flies back and forth across the country on Wednesday, the Security Council will meet. And on Friday, he will play host to a meeting at Camp David with his staunchest international ally in confronting Iraq, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain.

Yet no moment will be more vital for Mr. Bush than when he stands in the House chamber at 9 p.m. on Tuesday with a chance to sell an unfiltered version of himself to the country and the world.

Rather than focus on just guns or just butter, White House officials said, the speech will touch on three main themes: the threats from terrorism and Iraq; Mr. Bush's belief that his $670 billion tax cut proposal will help accomplish his goal of creating more jobs; and his plan to put the Medicare system on a sounder financial footing while adding coverage for prescription drugs.

But the subtext, Republicans said, will be re-establishing Mr. Bush as a leader after several months in which his standing has been reduced. The furor over Senator Trent Lott, the difficulty the administration has had in explaining why Iraq is an immediate threat while North Korea is not, the reluctance of moderate Republicans in the Senate to back his tax plan -- all, they said, have eaten away at the strength Mr. Bush exhibited in leading his party to victory in the Congressional elections.

''What he needs to do -- and what he clearly will do with the speech -- is re-establish the clarity of his leadership,'' said one prominent Republican with close ties to the White House. ''He needs to regain the momentum that stalled out after the election.''

Polls show that a substantial portion of the electorate is unconvinced of the need for an immediate war -- as are some of the nation's putative allies in a military campaign against Saddam Hussein. A grass-roots antiwar movement is beginning to make itself heard. Some Democrats are starting to warn assertively against a ''rush to war,'' as Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts put it.

At the same time, Mr. Bush's once sky-high approval ratings are receding to more normal levels, in part because of growing unease among voters about his handling of the economy, an issue that this White House in particular knows can sink even a wartime presidency.

Mr. Bush's aides and some of the White House's top outside advisers said the president was well aware of the tangle of difficulties he faces.

''There are great challenges that we face in this country,'' said Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director. ''He will speak to the fact that our country is equal to the task, that we are at a unique moment in our history to address some of the long, difficult challenges we face both at home and abroad.''

People who have been briefed on the speech said it would be shaped by Mr. Bush's emphasis on the moral basis for a foreign policy intended to rid the world of threats and lay the groundwork for freedom. ''Last year he talked about the axis of evil,'' said Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political adviser, referring to Iran, Iraq and North Korea. ''This is a chance for him to show what the policy has been over the last year and what the policy will be in the coming months toward those three countries.''

White House officials also said Mr. Bush would seek to re-emphasize the ''compassionate'' side of his agenda by discussing the need to provide prescription drug coverage to the poorest of the elderly while touching on issues like the need for a greater international effort to combat AIDS.

Mostly, Mr. Bush's advisers said, the speech would try to bring to life his philosophy that the presidency is about big, bold initiatives.

Democratic strategists said Mr. Bush had to overcome two specific hurdles: convincing the American people that there is a compelling case, backed by hard evidence, for abandoning diplomacy and dealing with Iraq militarily; and addressing the perception among some voters that his administration is using the economy's weakness as justification to provide more tax cuts to its wealthy benefactors.

More broadly, they said, Mr. Bush will have to counter the impression -- one that Democrats are not averse to promoting -- that the country has gotten off track in foreign and domestic policy.

''I don't know what he will say,'' Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, told an audience in Cleveland on Friday. ''But as I travel around the nation and listen to people with all kinds of backgrounds and beliefs, I hear one thing: concern. The state of our union today is anxious.''

Administration officials have been playing down expectations that Mr. Bush will use the State of the Union address to unveil the ''smoking gun'' evidence against Iraq that a substantial element of public opinion seems to be demanding as justification for military action.

But without something concrete on the table Tuesday night to prove his case that American lives need to be put at risk before the inspections effort comes to a more conclusive end, Democrats said, Mr. Bush risks going to war with the nation split -- and allies bitter.

''What I see is a real erosion of support, because people think he's going to attack without providing full information,'' said Representative Robert T. Matsui, Democrat of California. ''He has to give us more than we know now. I happen to believe there are probably weapons of mass destruction there, but thus far the case hasn't been made, and you can't attack on the basis of presumption.''

One touch that has become routine at the State of the Union is for the president to invite guests to sit in his box in the House chamber. White House officials would not say who will get the seats of honor.

But there is no question that Mr. Bush will face a tougher audience than he did last year. Among those present in the visitors' gallery will be firefighters -- including, according to The Daily News, Bob Beckwith, the retired firefighter who stood with Mr. Bush in the rubble of the World Trade Center -- who are pressing the administration for more money to monitor the health of people who worked at ground zero.
