

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IN WASHINGTON; U.S.  IS  DISMISSING RUSSIA'S CRITICISM OF STRIKES IN IRAQ
By Patrick E. Tyler
Oct. 1, 2002


The Bush administration today brushed aside criticism from Russia that intensifying airstrikes by American and British warplanes on radar and antiaircraft installations in Iraq were interfering with the diplomacy aimed at averting war.

As criticism of the weekend bombing raids around Basra, in southern Iraq, reverberated through foreign capitals, the White House today pressed ahead on multiple fronts to win United Nations support for a toughly worded draft resolution calling on President Saddam Hussein to disarm immediately or face a full-scale military attack.

Democrats, meanwhile, worked today to win White House support for a resolution in Congress that would narrow the conditions for an attack against Iraq, in hopes of drawing support from skeptics of military action. [Page A19.]

At the United Nations, the United States deputy representative, James B. Cunningham, and the British ambassador, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, briefed the 10 rotating members of the Security Council on the draft. Mr. Cunningham emphasized that a tough resolution backed by a credible threat of force was more likely to lead to ''genuine disarmament'' that would be ''the last chance for peace.''

Both the United States and Britain want to ''avoid war if possible,'' Sir Jeremy told the Council members, according to diplomats who attended the meeting in New York. Sir Jeremy assured members that ''regime change,'' the stated goal of the Bush administration, would not be on the agenda unless Mr. Hussein refused to disarm, when the ''human element'' would have to be addressed, he said, referring to the Iraqi leader.

The draft resolution began circulating on Friday as a joint American-British text and it has yet to be made public. It will be formally presented on Tuesday to the three other permanent Security Council members, France, Russia and China, whose veto authority makes their votes crucial.

In Vienna, Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations inspection organization for Iraq, completed his first day of meetings with senior Iraqi officers on the practical arrangements for the return of international weapons inspectors to Iraq by mid-October. The inspectors left in 1998. Mr. Blix was scheduled to give a full report on his encounter with the Iraqis by Thursday.

Diplomats at the United Nations and in Washington said France, Russia and China were unwavering in opposing the Bush administration's formulation, under which United Nations inspectors would return to Iraq under a single resolution that authorized a military attack in the event that Baghdad thwarted the inspectors' work.

The Russian and Chinese foreign ministers conferred by telephone today on Iraq, and both emphasized the importance of working within the framework of the United Nations and giving priority to winning Iraq's compliance through diplomacy.

France's foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, reiterated that his country would not support any resolution that gives the United States a ''blank check'' to attack. The French have even invented a word to describe what they dislike about the American-British draft: automaticity.

Writing in the newspaper Le Monde, Mr. de Villepin said his government was in agreement that ''Iraq constitutes a potential menace to regional and international security.'' But, he added, ''an action whose stated goal from the outset is regime change would be against international law and open the way to all sorts of abuses.''

A German diplomat said today that ''wording that clearly indicates that the inspection team should not be hindered, that no obstacle should be put in their way, and that they have immediate and unfettered access to whatever site they want -- this would find vast unanimity on the Security Council.''

But he said the current American-British draft created a ''whole new structure'' of inspectors under the control of Washington and London ''and as soon as Iraq violates one of their conditions, the member states would have the right to use all necessary means'' to fight Iraq's non-compliance.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell spoke by telephone with Mr. de Villpin today. The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, was also pressed on whether the administration would accept a formula of two resolutions, one demanding compliance and the second authorizing force in the absence of compliance.

''We've come down on the side of one resolution,'' Mr. Boucher said. But Secretary Powell, in an interview on the PBS program ''The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer,'' seemed to hold out the prospect for compromise.

''The United States position is that we believe it would be better to put this in one resolution, but since this is a consultation, we want to hear what our friends have to say,'' he said.

Secretary Powell also reiterated President Bush's determination to act should the United Nations fail to do so. ''If Iraq once again violates the will of the international community, action is going to be necessary,'' he said in the television interview. ''And I can't rule out that that action might be of a multilateral as well as a unilateral action.''

He also said he hoped the Security Council would have its work done by the time Mr. Blix and his inspectors headed for Baghdad, because a new resolution would create ''new guidance'' that ''might require him to modify his plan'' for inspections.

To varying degrees, France, China and Russia would like to see inspectors return to Iraq for an initial period of perhaps two months of inspections and then return to the Security Council to report on the level of cooperation toward disarmament.

Though Mr. Boucher and other administration spokesmen maintained an uncompromising posture, other administration officials said compromise was possible.

''There is still flexibility with us on one or two resolutions,'' said one administration official, referring to the French demand that one resolution call on Mr. Hussein to comply with his obligations to disarm, and, if he fails to do so, a second resolution authorizing the use of force to bring him into compliance.

''There is some thought that perhaps you could pre-agree on language for a second resolution,'' the official continued. That would avoid ''wasting time later by having the debate all over again and giving Saddam more time to delay.''

In Moscow today, President Vladimir V. Putin met with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel, who was taking advantage of a previously arranged visit to express Israeli support for action to disarm Iraq.

But Mr. Putin used the occasion to express his support only for the return of United Nations inspectors to Iraq and ''to get a solution by political and diplomatic means.'' Later, the Foreign Ministry issued a statement expressing regret over the escalating number of airstrikes against Iraq.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld dismissed the Russian complaint as ''nonsensical,'' because, he said, the increasing frequency of bombing missions coincided with the increasing frequency of Iraqi attempts to target allied warplanes in the no-flight zones.

But other administration officials had said last week that there had been an ''inter-agency'' decision to escalate the bombing missions in Iraq as a signal to the population that the United States is serious about overthrowing Saddam Hussein.

There was a strong push by the White House to direct the attention of the news media to the Pentagon's briefing in which new video evidence was shown of Iraqi attacks on allied aircraft policing the no-flight zones.

Congress, meanwhile, tried again to put numbers on what a military conflict with Iraq might cost. The Congressional Budget Office provided members of Congress a new study today that said that deploying the military to the Persian Gulf would cost $9 billion to $13 billion.

Prosecuting a war would then cost $6 billion to $9 billion a month, it said. Returning American forces to their home bases after the completion of the conflict would cost $5 billion to $7 billion, the study said, with an occupation force in Iraq costing $1 billion to $4 billion a month. The study did not try to estimate the costs of any rebuilding program or foreign aid provided to Iraq.
