
THREATS AND RESPONSES: STRATEGY; Allies Hope to Move Quickly To Seize City in Iraq's South
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 18, 2003

One of the first major objectives in the war against Iraq will be to seize its largest southern city, Basra, and secure its port facilities and nearby oil fields.

Officials say they are aiming for a rapid and ''benign'' occupation of Basra that results in flag-waving crowds hugging British and American soldiers -- all of which would create an immediate positive image of American and British war goals while undermining Iraqi resistance elsewhere in the country.

But things rarely go as planned in war, and as the onset of conflict appeared imminent today, soldiers prayed and prepared to move. Everywhere a sense that the waiting was almost over was palpable among military units.

This afternoon, soldiers of the Third Infantry Division's First Brigade Combat Team began packing up and dismantling parts of a mobile command center in the Kuwaiti desert. They packed their own bags, too. The division is to head for Baghdad and beyond.

''You could call it relief, almost, that something is happening,'' said Capt. Andrew J. Valles, the brigade's civil-military operations officer.

[In a further sign that military activity was rapidly speeding up, marines at the forward headquarters in Kuwait for the First Marine Division, which will lead the drive toward Baghdad, began on Tuesday morning to load their gear onto Humvees, trucks and other vehicles. There was a sense that they would not be returning to the base, Camp Matilda, anytime soon.]

As a military objective, Basra, a largely Shiite Muslim city of more than one million people with no great affection for President Saddam Hussein's government, is thought to be vulnerable.

The Iraqi military command has ordered all of its front-line divisions to pull back to defend Baghdad, officials said, leaving poorly trained and equipped garrison units to protect the port city and the oil fields that straddle the border region with Kuwait, just 40 miles south of Basra.

The city is a key to Iraq's southern oil region. Not all of the signals suggest that it will fall easily. Last week President Hussein appointed the most notorious member of his inner circle, Ali Hassan al-Majid, to direct the defense of southern Iraq. Mr. Majid, known as ''Chemical Ali,'' has been accused of war crimes for his use of mustard and nerve gases against the Kurdish population in northern Iraq in 1988.

American officials are not certain whether Mr. Hussein appointed Mr. Majid, a close relative, to ensure that the restive Shiites of southern Iraq remained loyal to Baghdad, or whether Mr. Majid has been entrusted with executing a military strategy devised to blunt or undermine the American-British invasion.

''We fully recognize his image and his track record,'' a military official said.

One fear is that Mr. Hussein, by appearing to expose Basra to easy occupation, is preparing to surprise American and British forces by attacking them with chemical or biological weapons.

''All I can tell you is that the marines will be wearing their chem suits,'' the official added, referring to the protective clothing and gas masks designed to protect soldiers from attacks with chemical or biological weapons.

The fate of Basra is viewed as critical. ''The first image of this war will define the conflict,'' said Maj. Chris Hughes, a Marine Corps spokesman. Military officials said the 15th Marine Expeditionary Unit, under the command of the British Royal Marines, had been designated to take Basra.

An early success, if secured, would inoculate the military to some extent against any setbacks that occur in Baghdad, where a powerful American army of tanks, mobile artillery and infantry will face down Mr. Hussein's most loyal and best armed Republican Guard divisions. The willingness of these Guard divisions to fight will determine in greatest measure the human cost of the war, military officials say.

If Basra falls, American and British officials are planning to organize relief convoys of food and other aid that can roll into the city from depots positioned here and in Iranian cities that lie just east of Basra across the Shatt-al-Arab waterway.

Soldiers will carry packets of food to pass out to children, and medics will provide care to Iraqis in need as the occupation forces roll in, military officials said. To speed the relief work, the Pentagon has dispatched a 60-member disaster response team that will enter the city with British and American troops.

American officials said they had begun radio broadcasts and leaflet drops in and around Basra to notify residents that the attacking allied forces will use kid gloves in taking the city.

They will avoid bombing electrical and other civilian infrastructure targets, the officials said, and are advising civilians that they will be safe in their homes and that there is no need to flee the city.

Still, Major Hughes said there was no guarantee of success.

''As important as images are, we don't have a lot of control over it,'' he said.

Nevertheless, American and British military officials are already discussing plans to act at the first sign that Basra's residents are ready to greet them with open arms. They have discussed busing journalists into the city, and even flying in television correspondents by helicopter to record any scenes of jubilation.

Such scenes, in the view of many analysts, are possible if the Basra campaign is carefully orchestrated.

Iraq's southern population is dominated by Arabs who follow the Shiite branch of Islam. Theirs is a history of discontent since the Ottoman Empire collapsed at the end of World War I and the province of Basra was incorporated into a new Iraqi state dominated by Baghdad and the Sunni Muslims of central Iraq.

Basra's Shiites staged an uprising at the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991, after the first President Bush encouraged all Iraqis to overthrow Mr. Hussein. Thousands were killed, tortured or imprisoned when Mr. Hussein's scattered army regrouped and brutally suppressed a series of rebellions in the south and among the Kurds in the north.

This time, Saudi and Kuwaiti intelligence services have worked with Western officials to communicate to tribal leaders in Iraq that the British and American forces are coming to liberate them for good.

''The Iraqis inside Iraq are talking about one thing: the salvation,'' said Abdel Reda al-Asiri, a professor at Kuwait University and a scholar of Shiite history in the region.

Today, he added, Iraqis regard the impending invasion by a Western army as ''a war that will end all their misery, wars and tyranny.''

Iraqis, he said, though they are still isolated, get enough information from foreign radio broadcasts to understand the difference between the impending military operations and the 1991 war to push Iraqi forces out of Kuwait.

''During the uprising in 1991 the people felt powerless,'' he said. ''But now you can be assured there will be tens of uprisings this time around the south. In '91 the Americans came to liberate Kuwait; in 2003 they are coming to liberate Iraq.''

British and American officials would not comment on the size of the British and American marine force that is to peel away from the main army that marches on Baghdad. A British official said a ''pumped up'' division of 15,000 to 20,000 British marines was ready in Kuwait.

An American official said the 15th Marine Expeditionary Force, which saw extensive action in Afghanistan, could contribute as many as 2,500 marines.

For Britain a successful campaign to liberate Basra would be a vindication of its last war in Mesopotamia, which sought to claim Iraq and its oil wealth during World War I.

The Ottoman Empire was collapsing, and after taking Basra in 1914, a small British force under the command of Maj. Gen. Charles Townshend marched up the Tigris to within 25 miles of Baghdad, only to fall back in the face of Turkish counterattacks. British losses were 23,000 dead and wounded, with another 7,000 British prisoners dying after Townshend's surrender.
