
THREATS AND RESPONSES: WASHINGTON; U.S. WOULD ACCEPT SHORT EXTENSION OF IRAQ DEADLINE
By Richard W. Stevenson With Felicity Barringer
March 12, 2003

The Bush administration said today that it would accept a short extension of United Nations weapons inspections in Iraq beyond the deadline of Monday it proposed last week, but signaled that diplomatic efforts to delay or avert war had all but run their course.

The White House said President Bush would force a vote by the end of the week in the deeply fractured Security Council on an American-backed resolution giving an ultimatum to Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader. White House officials said Mr. Bush wanted a vote despite France's pledge to veto a resolution on Iraq and doubts about whether the United States can even muster the nine votes needed to adopt a resolution in the absence of a veto.

At the United Nations, Britain and other nations worked frenetically to come up with a compromise. But the White House rejected calls by some nations for a month or more of inspections, and American officials were dismissive of a proposal floated by Britain today to give Iraq even 10 more days to show that it is complying with demands that it disarm.

Diplomats at the United Nations said the United States might back a plan that would give Iraq 7 to 10 days from passage of a new resolution to come into compliance. The proposals under consideration would establish specific tests of Iraq's willingness to disarm and to cooperate with weapons inspectors. Assuming a vote on Thursday or Friday, such a resolution would extend the deadline under the current American-backed proposal by three days to a week.

The maneuvering and the lack of consensus exposed deep strains within and among the Security Council members. Britain in particular was scrambling to develop a compromise that could attract at least eight or nine votes, driven in part by growing domestic pressure on Prime Minister Tony Blair not to join in military action alongside the United States without authorization from the United Nations.

Amid growing questions about Mr. Blair's political fate, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said at a news conference at the Pentagon today that American and British officials were discussing the extent of Britain's participation in any war every day or two, and that the United States could proceed military without Britain if necessary.

But Mr. Rumsfeld later issued a statement backing away from his suggestion that Britain might not fight alongside the United States.

He said his remarks were intended to point out that ''obtaining a second United Nations Security Council resolution is important to the United Kingdom'' and that the United States supported Britain on that score. ''In the event that a decision to use force is made, we have every reason to believe there will be a significant military contribution from the United Kingdom,'' he said in the statement.

Britain has about 25,000 troops in the region. They have been expected to roll into southern Iraq from Kuwait along with American forces, and then to help secure southern Iraq and its oil fields as the invasion advances north toward Baghdad.

Mr. Bush met today at the White House with Mr. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The White House declined to say what they spoke about, but General Myers said later at the Pentagon that the United States now had 225,000 military personnel in the region and is ready to start an invasion anytime Mr. Bush gives the order.

''If the president makes the decision to do so, they stand ready to disarm Iraq,'' General Myers said.

Two American U-2 reconnaissance airplanes were recalled to base early today after a tense and confusing incident over Iraq that left some American officials saying one plane had been threatened by Iraqi jet fighters. Iraqi officials said they simply had not been notified properly about that flight.

The United Nations said the surveillance flights, manned by American crews but conducted in support of the United Nations inspections process, had been temporarily suspended ''in the interest of safety.''

The aircraft were flying separate missions when, said two United States officials who spoke on condition of anonymity, Iraq sent fighter jets and threatened one of the planes. Mr. Rumsfeld said the U-2 had not been directly threatened in the air. Another American official said the threat was delivered verbally by Iraqi officials to the United Nations.

Meanwhile, after another round of calls today by Mr. Bush and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to their counterparts around the world, it remained unclear whether the United States could come up with the nine votes it would need for passage of any resolution by the 15-member Council even without a veto.

Despite doubts among some senior administration officials about the wisdom of forcing a vote if the United States is sure to lose, Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said Mr. Bush wanted a vote even if it only made a symbolic point by forcing Council members to go on the record supporting or opposing enforcement of previous United Nations demands that Iraq disarm.

A vote drawing support from eight or nine nations could also allow the United States and Britain to argue that France was thwarting the will of the majority of the Council.

''It matters whether or not other members of the Security Council support immediate disarmament, and they will have their opportunity to do so in the form of a vote,'' Mr. Fleischer said.

''The president has encouraged this diplomacy to take place, but what the president has said is that there is room for a little more diplomacy but not a lot of time to do it,'' he said. ''The vote will take place this week.''

It is not clear whether Mr. Bush will feel bound by the original deadline of Monday, March 17, if the Security Council does not adopt a new resolution.

A group of six nations whose votes on the Council will be crucial appeared to have given up on its effort to propose a unified position, a diplomat from one of the nations said. He said he was waiting to see what the British would propose. The six nations are Pakistan, Chile, Mexico, Cameroon, Angola and Guinea.

Among those, Pakistan indicated today that it would prefer more time to search for a peaceful solution in Iraq and strongly suggested that it would not support a resolution that could justify an attack.

The version being circulated by Britain now declares Iraq to have failed to comply with previous United Nations resolutions, but would provide the Council an opportunity to find by a specific date that Iraq had complied -- in effect forcing the Council to vote to rescind what would otherwise be seen as authorizing war. The date being discussed for the deadline is March 27, European and American diplomats said.

But the proposal is unacceptable to the French because they say they believe that the United States would simply veto any finding by the Council that Iraq had come into compliance, diplomats said. It was also criticized by American officials for giving Mr. Hussein too much time to comply with resolutions that they said he had evaded for 12 years.

The Security Council opened up the debate to members of the General Assembly, giving Iraq and Kuwait a chance to square off.

Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammed Aldouri, began the session with a speech crafted for an Islamic audience, charging that the goal of the United States and Britain is ''to lay their hands on our oil, to control the region, to redraw its borders.'' Ultimately, he said, the goal of any war would be ''a new, direct colonization of the region.''

He also said that Iraq ''has made the decision'' to disarm.

He was followed by the Kuwaiti envoy, Mohammad Abulhasan, who ridiculed Iraq's claims of cooperation with inspectors, saying it was ''merely procedural.''
