

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PROTESTS

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PROTESTS; 1.5 Million Demonstrators In Cities Across Europe Oppose a War Against Iraq
By Alan Cowell
Feb. 16, 2003

From the parks of London to the piazzas of Rome and the avenues of Paris and Berlin, more than 1.5 million Europeans marched today in a huge protest against war in Iraq. It was the Continent's biggest coordinated peace demonstration in memory and left many protesters jubilant at the show of antiwar sentiment.

With similar protests taking place in scores of cities around the world, including New York, demonstrators in London streamed along Piccadilly Circus and Whitehall, close to 10 Downing Street, the residence of Prime Minister Tony Blair, Washington's most committed ally in the effort to force President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to disarm.

Across Europe from the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin to the Piazza Venezia in Rome and the Place de la Bastille in Paris, protesters of many ages, backgrounds and political affiliations shouted, blew whistles and raised banners to oppose any war in Iraq. Highways filled with buses bringing demonstrators from provinces to major cities as Washington's planning for a war touched a raw, pacifist nerve among Europeans either opposed in principle to the war, suspicious of Washington's motives or unconvinced by the evidence cited in the United States and Britain as justifying an invasion.

''This is a question of voting by foot,'' said Christian Taylor, 31, an ecologist who had traveled 150 miles from Devon, in southwest England, to march in London. ''It sends a very powerful signal internationally.''

For many, the focus of that message was Mr. Blair himself. ''I believe that we should have peace rather than war,'' said Pamela Keats, 55, a fashion expert from London. ''Tony Blair lives in a democracy and he's lucky to live in a democracy and he should listen to the people.''

Many in Italy, Britain, the Netherlands and Germany said their target was not the American people but the Bush administration. ''Most are not anti-American -- they are against the Bush government and its foreign policy,'' said Ruth Oldenziel in Amsterdam. About 200 Americans marched side by side in the Amsterdam protest with exiled Iraqis. The Dutch police estimated the number of protesters at 70,000.

The same sentiments, however, found much harsher expression in a vituperative attack on President Bush by Ken Livingstone, the mayor of London, who recalled Mr. Bush's personal history, calling him a draft-dodger, a ''stooge for the oil industry'' and a stock market swindler. ''And we are asked to send our young women and men to die for this creature? I don't think so,'' he said.

But, in a mood more carnival than confrontational, many across Europe said they believed that their marching had a real chance of shaping history. ''When there are this many people, there's a special feeling,'' said Valerio Conti, 40, a factory worker from Tuscany, as a protest in Rome wound its way from the Circus Maximus and across the Piazza Venezia. ''It's as if we really have the ability to change the world.''

The British police estimated the number of marchers in London at 750,000. Organizers said that almost two million people, many of them traveling across the country by bus, took part. The biggest previous rally recorded in Britain came last fall, when some 400,000 people marched in support of rural Britons.

The demonstrations came just one day after one of the chief United Nations weapons inspectors, Hans Blix, told the Security Council that Iraq's cooperation with his team had increased, deepening the aversion of countries like France, Germany and Russia to the readiness of the United States and Britain to go to war.

The demonstrators want to force Mr. Blair to distance himself from the United States' effort, a move that would strip Washington of its principal ally and undermine its claim to international support.

''The prime minister and the president have got to start listening,'' said Charles Kennedy, an opposition leader in the British Parliament.

Even as hundreds of thousands marched through his capital, waving banners and blowing whistles, however, Mr. Blair stood firm in his support for President Bush, telling a meeting of his Labor Party in Glasgow that Mr. Hussein ''would not be making a single concession without the knowledge that forces are gathering against him.''

As he spoke, about 25,000 demonstrators gathered outside the hall where the conference was being held, roaring their disapproval. Some Labor delegates joined the protest.

While Mr. Blair challenged the marchers to consider Mr. Hussein's bloodstained human rights record, marchers generally insisted, in the words of Seth Green, a 23-year-old American student who joined the London march, that ''the antiwar movement does not have to support Saddam Hussein.'' Mr. Green said he joined the march because he wanted ''to send the message that you can be pro-American and antiwar'' a message that suffused protests in Berlin, Amsterdam and elsewhere.

As he spoke, the demonstrators poured into Hyde Park, where speakers exhorted Mr. Blair and President Bush to bow to the protesters' demands for peace. In Berlin, protesters from the eastern and western parts of the city met at the Brandenburg Gate, once a symbol of the city's cold war division. The police said the number of protesters was around 500,000.

Some German protesters carried placards proclaiming pride in ''Old Europe,'' the term used dismissively by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to pour scorn on French and German opposition to the war.

In Paris, the police said 100,000 demonstrators marched the three miles from the capital's Place Denfert-Rochereau to the Place de la Bastille, filling the broad Boulevard Saint Michel, which passes the French Senate, and spilling into the surrounding streets.

''Bush will never admit it, but I know this war is about the oil because you look in the paper and you read about North Korea conducting nuclear testing, and Bush doesn't seem too worried about that,'' said William Bazot, a 36-year-old Parisian holding his infant boy, who wore a cardboard sign declaring ''No to the War.''

The demonstrations have coaxed forth a broad, informal coalition from Muslim activists to hard-left-wingers. Some in London carried banners saying ''Freedom for Palestine.'' The protesters included young children and veterans of the 1960's Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, older people in wheelchairs and babies in strollers. Some were demonstrating for the first time.

Karie Rudsbraaten, 44, from Woking, just outside London, said she had never marched before but ''nothing has been as important as this.''

Apart from politicians, rock stars and other celebrities, writers and intellectuals have come out in support of the march, challenging Mr. Blair to recognize that he faces a groundswell of popular discontent.

In Italy, the police said at least 600,000 people took part; organizers put the figure at over one million.

Even in Baghdad, several thousand Iraqis staged an orchestrated demonstration, chanting, ''We love Saddam Hussein.'' Protests were also reported from as far afield as Kashmir and New Zealand, Hong Kong, Prague, Moscow and Tokyo. In Russia, one of the leaders of the antiwar coalition in the United Nations, about 700 demonstrators turned out opposite the American Embassy for a Communist-led protest against United States policy in general, and against Mr. Bush in particular. The turnout was also relatively low in Prague.

In Turkey, where the government is wrestling with a request to allow American troops to use the country as a base against neighboring Iraq, thousands called on their leaders to stay out of the conflict.

Several thousand people gathered in the Kadikoy Iskelesi neighborhood of Istanbul to denounce the military preparations and America's leading role. While young men shouted into bullhorns, others held aloft large banners that offered one-line appraisals of the looming war. ''We won't be anyone's soldiers,'' read one.

''We are here to protest the sorrow inflicted on the world's nations by the U.S.A.,'' Huseyin Kahraman, a 32-year-old computer specialist, said in a typical comment. ''We are here today to show and prove that we can prevent war.''
