
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Closer Ties With China May Help U.S. on Iraq
By James Dao
Oct. 4, 2002


After a stormy start, the Bush administration's relations with China have improved to the point where senior administration officials and many China experts say they think Beijing may agree not to block a tough United Nations resolution on Iraq.

Just 18 months ago, ties between the two nuclear powers were deeply strained by the collision of an American spy plane and a Chinese fighter jet over Hainan Island. But the war on terrorism has driven the two countries closer together, as has a shared need for Middle Eastern oil, officials and China experts say.

President Bush, who entered office pledging to take a tougher stand toward China, has brought a personal touch to the diplomacy, visiting China twice in one year, a first for an American president.

Later this month, China's president, Jiang Zemin, is scheduled to visit Mr. Bush at his ranch in Crawford, Tex.

Now, over the objections of its conservative allies in Congress, the White House is preparing to restart high-level military talks with China and expand a range of military-to-military programs that had been curtailed following the spy plane incident, senior administration officials said. China has lobbied to renew the military contacts.

In recent decades, America's relations with China have swung back and forth between cold antagonism and warm engagement, and some significant issues still separate the two countries, like Taiwan, which has received military support from the United States but which Beijing considers a renegade province.

Officials cautioned that the current warm period in United States-China relations could freeze over if China's support for the war on terrorism faded or Beijing became more belligerent toward Taiwan. But senior administration officials said they were heartened by the recent developments.

''China is changing,'' a senior administration official said. ''We really see a China that is trying to establish itself as a more respected figure in a global sense.''

China, a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, has urged the United States to find a peaceful resolution to the impasse with Iraq. But unlike in the past, Beijing has not been sharply critical of the Pentagon's war preparations. It has also clearly left the door open to supporting military action against Iraq, though it has hinted it may favor the French and Russian approach.

''I definitely think it's something we can work with them on,'' a senior administration official involved in China policy said. ''They might indeed vote yes.''

The decision to expand military contacts is just the latest in a series of conciliatory gestures between the two nuclear-armed competitors that underscore a warming trend.

In August, China issued new regulations intended to restrict the export of missile technology to countries like North Korea, Iraq, Iran, Libya and Syria, which the United States has accused of aiding terrorists. Reducing such high-tech Chinese exports has been a major concern of American diplomats for a decade.

At the same time, the United States announced it was adding an obscure Chinese separatist group, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, to a list of terrorist organizations, a move Beijing had lobbied for strongly.

Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on Washington and New York, China has also allowed the United States to station an F.B.I. counterterrorism agent in Beijing and shared intelligence with the United States on militant Islamic groups based in Asia.

At Washington's urging, China has also pressured its close ally, Pakistan, to ease tensions with India, senior Bush administration officials said.

In an interview last month, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said he thought the Sept. 11 attacks had helped ''speed up an improvement in our relations'' with China.

''Here was something that had nothing to do with contests between two competing ideologies: communism and capitalism,'' Secretary Powell said. ''Here was an enemy that affected us all. And it was something that everybody could join in against.''

But hawks in the Pentagon and conservatives in Congress, who view China as an ambitious and potentially dangerous competitor in the Pacific, have been uneasy about the improving relations. In particular, many of them oppose expanding military contacts, arguing that the Chinese learn too much about American military capabilities from such exchanges.

''We can see no national security interest that is served by a resumption of more extensive contacts and exchanges,'' five conservative Republican senators said in a letter to President Bush in July.

The senators were Jesse Helms of North Carolina, Sam Brownback of Kansas, Richard C. Shelby of Alabama, Jon Kyl of Arizona and Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire.

Human rights advocates have also voiced concerns that the United States is turning a blind eye to rights violations in China in exchange for winning Beijing's support for military action against Iraq and Al Qaeda.

''The administration is trying to manage a balancing act, getting China's cooperation on Iraq and counterterrorism and keeping up pressure on human rights,'' said Mike Jendrzejczyk, the Asia director for Human Rights Watch in Washington. ''So far, the record is mixed.''

Administration officials deny relaxing their vigilance on China's rights record.

''We have not given up on any of our principles,'' Secretary Powell said last month. ''We have let the Chinese know that we do not approve of some of their human rights practices.''

But senior administration officials also acknowledge that warmer relations with Beijing could smooth the way for Chinese to accept military action against Iraq. China's tacit consent is also considered important if the United States is to keep warplanes and troops on China's western doorstep in Kyrgyzstan and other Central Asian countries.

Asked why China might accept American-led action against Iraq, a senior administration official said, ''The Chinese have a new interest in stability in the Middle East and they are not interested in exporters of weapons of mass destruction, especially those that might go to terrorist groups.''

The official added, ''Future energy supplies are a concern for China in a way that never was the case before.''

The United States' military-to-military programs -- which can include exchanges between war colleges, joint exercises, equipment sales and port calls -- have become an important diplomatic tool for dealing with both friendly and rival nations.

In the case of China, the programs were used for years to establish lines of communication between senior commanders. They were also intended to send a stern message about American military power by allowing Chinese officers to see up close advanced military hardware.

''We had a great deal to gain from making it clear about what our capabilities were, which were awesome,'' said Dennis Blair, a retired admiral who was commander of United States Pacific Command until May. ''My view was, the more individual Chinese officers understood that with their own eyes, the better.''

But critics of the programs, who call themselves the blue team, contend Chinese could use the exchanges to find weak points in the American military. They also complain that American officers are repeatedly sent to the same Chinese installations, which yield little information about China's equipment, training or tactics.

For that reason, the Pentagon plans to review all new exchanges closely to ensure that Beijing is providing greater access to American officers in China than in the past, military officials said.

''It's already expanding,'' a senior Pentagon official said.

''We still look at things case by case, and review to make sure things are consistent with our interest. But a lot of things are approved, and there is a lot of contact.''
Correction: Oct. 8, 2002
An article on Friday about the possibility that China might support the United States in its plans against Iraq now that American-Chinese ties have improved misstated the location of a collision 18 months ago between an American spy plane and a Chinese fighter. It was over international waters. (The damaged plane landed on Hainan Island, leading to a standoff over its return.)

