
THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUSSEIN'S DOMAIN; Day of Rest on What May Be Eve Of War Finds Baghdad Eerily Calm
By John F. Burns
March 15, 2003

His horse, Point Man, was the joint favorite in the fourth race today at the Amiriya racetrack. So when the gray gelding could be seen well back in the pack at the first turn, Muhammad Sadiq Anizi handed his binoculars to a guest who had wagered $1 on the horse to win, and counseled that the investment was safe.

''Just wait,'' the wealthy 53-year-old Baghdad car dealer said. ''I know this jockey. He bides his time. He'll come on in the stretch.''

At the second turn of the dirt track, in an afternoon heat rising into the 80's, the horse was fading. ''Keep cool,'' Mr. Anizi said, as he loosened his tie. Entering the stretch, the horse was dead last in a field of 10. The horse came home 15 lengths behind the nearest finisher, bleeding profusely at the nose.

After a moment's banter with the winning owner, Mr. Anizi strode briskly to the unsaddling enclosure. After a brief talk with the jockey, Amer Fahed, he confided in his guest. ''We think somebody got to the horse. Somebody nobbled him in the stables before the race. Tranquilizers, perhaps. Without testing, we'll never know.''

And so things went on Friday, the Muslim day of rest -- perhaps the last such day, many Iraqis believe, before war breaks out between the United States and Iraq.

War anxieties rise and fall daily here, often in response to the latest snippet of news from the United Nations. But on one sunny afternoon at the track, as at many other gathering places across Baghdad, the mood was one of almost surreal calm, of everyday concerns that seemed to push thoughts of cruise missiles and smart bombs and helicopter-borne assault forces into the back of people's minds -- or at least into the hinterland of what they were prepared to say.

Perhaps 5,000 people turned up at the track to watch the eight-race card, about average for a Friday meeting. In the city, pool halls and Ottoman-era coffee shops and pinball arcades were busy as usual. The expressways that crisscross the Dallas that Saddam Hussein's bulldozers have made of one of the oldest cities in the Arab world -- with its array of vast new palaces, mosques, war monuments and statues in vast acres of open ground -- were busy carrying families out to stroll in the parks, or to linger over kebab lunches in restaurants, or to visit friends.

In Iraq, discerning what people think is a diviner's art, since people everywhere learned years ago to tailor their conversations with foreigners, and even with family and friends, to the prescriptions they take from the utterances of Mr. Hussein. If asked, they will say -- as owners and jockeys and stableboys and bettors did today at the racetrack -- that America is making a big mistake, that Iraq has no hidden weapons, that Iraqis will fight to the last, and that Allah, the protector of Muslims, will see to it that America's military might will founder at the gates of Baghdad.

But the more telling point, to an outsider, is how composed Iraqis remain. Privately, many admit to a nervousness about the risks of errant American bombing and missile attacks, and worry about whether they have stockpiled enough canned food and bottled water and candles and kerosene for lamps to last the war if it drags on beyond a couple of weeks. Still, in the main, they have gone to their jobs, paid their bills, watered their plants, laid plans for this week and the next and the one beyond -- and stuck to their pleasures, like heading out for a springtime day at the track.

Nowhere in Saddam Hussein's Iraq is free from the tight grip he has imposed in his decades in power, and the Amiriya track is no exception. In the track's offices and the Jockey Club building, officials display the occasional painting or photograph of a champion horse. But the images that dominate are those of Mr. Hussein and -- always just below, in smaller frames -- his oldest son, Uday Saddam Hussein, who is the Jockey Club president, and Amiriya's founding patron.

But more than the portraits, what registers at the racetrack -- or at almost any other place Iraqis gather these days, including government offices -- is how little is volunteered about the Iraqi leader.

No Iraqi can doubt that America intends, if it can, to remove Mr. Hussein from power, stripping this nation of 24 million people of a forbidding colossus. But facing the possibility of this transition, Iraqis say hardly anything about him, leaving non-Iraqis to divine what -- beyond caution, or a difficulty grasping what an Iraq without Mr. Hussein might be like -- the forbearance may portend.

What is beyond doubt, at Amiriya, is that the ruling family has left a mark on Iraqi horse racing no war can change. Britain brought the sport here in the 1920's, when Iraq was still a British mandate. By 1948, racing had settled on a grassy track at Mansour, close to the palace of King Faisal II, who was a regular until his assassination in 1958. In the new, professedly proletarian Iraq, the club spiraled downward until 1994, when Saddam Hussein ordered it bulldozed to make way for a mosque that is now a vast, Las Vegas-like structure of bare concrete towers and domes.

In 1995, the 38-year-old Uday Saddam Hussein gave the Jockey Club the land in Amiriya, a western suburb, along with a plan for a huge new grandstand. Now, the grandstand project stands abandoned, with only the stark concrete of its elevator towers to show for the plans.

Owners like Mr. Anizi say it has been some time since they have seen Uday Saddam Hussein, or his younger brother Qusay, who was the envy of Iraq's horse racing fraternity in the late 1990's when one of his horses swept every Amiriya classic stakes race before being sold to stud in Jordan. The two sons, like the father, are thus ubiquitous, in their photos, yet so elusive in person as to raise questions about how readily American troops would find them, should war bring American battalions to Baghdad.

Another thought that occurred at Amiriya was how much in Iraq mirrors life in countries like the United States. With American and British forces massing on Iraq's borders, just about everybody encountered at the track was unstintingly welcoming to a British-born reporter and an American photographer. ''Britain, good country!'' people said. ''America, O.K.'' To this, hastily added, were the anticipated reservations, often in English.

''Bush bad, Bush very bad,'' and ''Tony Blair no good.''

Amiriya seemed much like any racetrack elsewhere, with its dark tales of doping and other race fixing scams, the old trainers sitting in their checkered keffiyeh headdresses in the Jockey Club lounge telling tales of the golden age of racing under King Faisal and the jockeys and the stableboys in the saddling room pulling on their cigarettes and saying, with a surprising frankness, that life among the horses mattered more to them than any talk of war.

Ali Hamzeh, a 16-year-old novice jockey who is the talk of the stables for his wins, said, when questioned, that he had never heard of Mr. Blair, President Jacques Chirac of France, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, or even of United Nations weapons inspectors, and that, frankly, he didn't care. ''War, or no war, Americans or no Americans, I'll still be here with the horses,'' he said. And then, seeing an older jockey dismounting after winning the day's final race, he ran outside, cheering and dancing in the dust. ''Praise be upon our Prophet Muhammad'' he shouted, over and over again.
