
A NATION AT WAR: THE IRAQI CAPITAL; In Iraqi Capital, Sirens Precede Two Direct Hits
By John F. Burns
March 21, 2003

A second wave of air attacks tonight against the strategic heart of the capital had all the eeriness and sudden, devastating power of modern high-technology warfare.

The precision-guided bombs and missiles made at least two direct hits on a large, domed edifice beside the Tigris River. The building, possibly the Planning Ministry, exploded in a fireball and a series of secondary explosions that lighted the night sky.

After the initial early morning bombardment, which hit targets mostly well away from the center of the city, quiet prevailed over Baghdad all day.

The city's streets were virtually deserted apart from clusters of security men posted outside government buildings and the compounds of Saddam Hussein and his associates, many of them seated on plastic chairs and rickety bedframes, armed only with Kalashnikov rifles and the unenthused, lethargic, resigned look of men who knew that standing guard outside buildings likely to be struck by American air attacks placed them at mortal risk.

The stillness lasted well into the night.

Then, suddenly, across a panorama of a sprawling city as brightly lighted as any one in America, there was the near-deafening wail of air-raid sirens, proof that Iraqi radars continued to work despite years of intermittent air attacks. As in the predawn raid, the radars appeared to have detected the American attack while it was still some distance off. After the sirens were silenced, there was at least 10 minutes of antiaircraft and tracer fire in the night sky, a mesmerizing but apparently random fireworks display of white and yellow and red.

Still, there was no sound of high-flying jets, no roar of missile engines or whisper of falling bombs. A waning moon appeared, and then hid again, behind high cirrus clouds, and a breeze cooled the springtime air. The few cars and trucks that remained on Baghdad's multilane expressways and inner-city streets and bridges made for the only movement, rushing flat-out for sanctuary beyond the dartboard of a city under attack.

In the city's hotels, guests waited anxiously in the lobbies or sought refuge deep within the buildings.

Just as tensions began to ease, a huge blast erupted on the southern bank of the Tigris, the great waterway that flows through Baghdad to the Persian Gulf. Under Mr. Hussein, wide areas of Baghdad along the river have been bulldozed for palaces, monuments and imperial-style government buildings appropriate, so Mr. Hussein evidently believes, for the capital of a leader whose hagiography likens him to Nebuchadnezzar and Saladin and other giants of ancient Mesopotamia.

These are the areas Pentagon planners have been poring over for months, and their first choice tonight was a compound stretching back from the river from an entrance situated beside Al Jumhuriya bridge, one of five main bridges across the Tigris in Baghdad.

Two strikes hit directly at one of the largest structures, with another strike perhaps 1,000 yards to the southeast. More strikes followed, some seeming to fall on palace complexes, before, after 45 minutes, the night returned to silence.

The main target, said by some Iraqis to be the Planning Ministry, erupted in first one, then another fireball, followed by more explosions, and a vast, drifting cloud of black smoke that almost obscured the southern side of the Tigris from the view of reporters and photographers atop the 20-story roof of the Palestine Hotel, a mile away on the river's northern bank.

The smoke was so dense that it enveloped a huge, brooding building built like an ancient tomb, with vast slab sides leaning inward, that is said to be the office and home of Tariq Aziz, the No. 4 man in Mr. Hussein's hierarchy.

The strikes on at least half a dozen key government buildings began at 9:15 p.m. Baghdad time, about 16 hours after the initial wave of attacks just as dawn was breaking. The attacks appeared to have taken a toll on Mr. Hussein, whose somewhat disordered appearance on television shortly after the first raid left one Iraqi with the feeling that his leader had, as he put it, been exposed to a sudden, shocking blast of reality.

What no Iraqi official was prepared to discuss was what prompted Mr. Hussein's somewhat disordered appearance, barely three hours after the bombing raids started.

Even with the thick horn-rimmed eyeglasses that Iraqis said they had not seen him wearing before, Mr. Hussein appeared to have difficulty keeping his place in the handwritten text as he leafed through what looked like a large, grade- school exercise pad.

For months, years even, Mr. Hussein's speeches have been rambling and, Iraqis say, even confusing. But this address seemed, some Iraqis said later, even less cogent, and more repetitive than usual.

In the style he has favored since his defeat in the Persian Gulf war, Mr. Hussein spoke more like an Islamic preacher than the man who aspired, earlier in his 23 years as Iraq's absolute ruler, to inherit the mantle of modern, secularist Arab nationalism from Gamel Abdel Nasser of Egypt.

The speech appeared to raise more questions than it answered. Iraqis, in general, responded to tonight's attacks, as they did to the initial, 90-minute air raid earlier, with what appeared to be a mixture of relief and almost smug self-assurance.

Weeks of published Pentagon briefings that had forecast an aerial onslaught as the opening phase of the conflict, with as many as 3,000 cruise missiles to be launched in the first 48 hours, had prepared the Iraqi leadership for punishment far more severe than the first two American attacks on the capital.

Four soldiers and one civilian were killed in the combined attacks, an Iraqi government statement said.

The building that erupted in fire continued in flames for at least two hours with no sign of any fire-fighting efforts or even of any movement around the compound that could be seen with binoculars. The building used by Mr. Aziz appeared to be empty, with almost no interior lights on, as was the case with many of the palace complexes across the city.

Many Iraqis believe that Mr. Hussein and his top associates in the Revolutionary Command Council have gone underground into the maze of tunnels and bunkers beneath Baghdad. But lesser officials are visible and their task today appeared to be to present a facade of normality to match the mood of contempt for America and its military power that Mr. Hussein struck as the war approached.

To outsiders familiar with the armageddon bearing down on the Iraqi leadership, their attitude has seemed redolent of an authoritarian elite in deep denial, incapable of grasping reality, either about their external enemies or the mood of less powerful Iraqis, because of years of listening mainly to echoes of themselves.

But Iraqi ministers who met with reporters today protested, in effect, that it is America that is in denial, not Mr. Hussein and his associates.

Minutes after Mr. Hussein spoke, officials summoned the 200 members of the foreign press remaining in Baghdad to a news conference at which Muhammad Said al-Sahhaf appeared to confirm, even while mocking, an attempt to kill Mr. Hussein. Asked if there had been an American assassination attempt, he replied: ''I am sure that they are stupid, and that they will never succeed. But it proves that they are criminals and killers, and that they believe in assassination. They are stupid and criminals.''

Mr. Sahhaf spoke of ''the confidence coming from the Iraqi people, and first of all for the leadership of President Saddam Hussein.''

As for one reporter's suggestion that there is little Iraq can do to counter American might, he scoffed. ''Our reaction has not started yet, you'll see. In 1991, we saw a much larger scale of military action than we have seen now. We can absorb all military threats.''
