
STATE OF THE UNION: THE IRAQ ISSUE; Bush Enlarges Case For War by Linking Iraq With Terrorists
By Michael R. Gordon
Jan. 29, 2003

President Bush, enlarging the case for going to war with Iraq soon, said tonight that there was intelligence showing that Iraq was helping and protecting terrorists. He warned that Saddam Hussein could distribute weapons of mass destruction to terrorists who could use them against the United States.

Iraq's alleged terrorist connection is just one reason Mr. Bush cited for preparing for war. He also said Iraq could threaten the Persian Gulf region if it developed weapons of mass destruction, and he assailed its record on human rights.

To that end, he pointed to the example of North Korea, which is already suspected of having nuclear weapons and is, Mr. Bush said, ''an oppressive regime'' that rules by fear and starvation.

The allegation that Iraq is conspiring with terrorists seemed tailored to address the question of why it is important to act now.

In essence, Mr. Bush argued that military action is needed to avoid the risk of a Sept. 11-style attack using weapons of mass destruction. In last year's State of the Union address, Mr. Bush identified Iraq as a potential target. Tonight, he sought to make the case for why the United States needs to strike Iraq soon if it does not disarm.

With American forces massing in the Persian Gulf region and estimates that the United States and its allies could be ready to strike by late February or early March, Mr. Bush's speech was yet another sign that the administration has no intention of yielding to reluctant allies and domestic critics who argue that the United States should allow more time for United Nations inspections in Iraq.

The countdown for a military attack seems to be under way. Signaling that the hour of battle is approaching, Mr. Bush went so far in his speech as to address American forces, saying, ''some crucial hours may lie ahead.''

''Before Sept. 11, 2001, many in the world believed that Saddam Hussein could be contained,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But chemical agents and lethal viruses and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons, and other plans, this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take just one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known. We will do everything in our power to make sure that day never comes.''

It is clear that his argument has enormous appeal for the administration in terms of its public diplomacy. For many Americans, protecting the nation against terrorists is a far more persuasive rationale for going to war than preventing Iraq from developing new weapons that could change the balance of power in the oil-rich Persian Gulf.

Administration hard-liners have long been suspicious that there are hidden links between Saddam Hussein and terrorist groups, relations Iraq could exploit to attack the United States while masking its responsibility. ''Evidence from intelligence sources, secret communications, and statements by people now in custody, reveal that Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaeda,'' the president said in his speech. ''Secretly, and without fingerprints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists, or help them develop their own.''

Mr. Bush said Secretary of State Colin L. Powell would go to the Security Council next week and provide intelligence on Iraq's weapons programs, terrorist links and attempts to deceive the United Nations. But he did not spell out what that new information is.

Just a few months ago, the C.I.A. told Congress that Iraq was striving to develop weapons of mass destruction but was unlikely to orchestrate terrorist attacks in the United States unless Washington struck Iraq first. The C.I.A. has never amended that public assessment.

''Baghdad for now appears to be drawing a line short of conducting terrorist attacks with conventional or C.B.W. against the United States,'' the C.I.A. said, referring to chemical and biological weapons, in an Oct. 7 letter to Congress. ''Should Saddam conclude that a U.S.-led attack could no longer be deterred, he probably would become much less constrained in adopting terrorist actions,'' the C.I.A. added. ''Saddam might decide that the extreme step of assisting Islamist terrorists in conducting a W.M.D. attack against the United States would be his last chance to exact vengeance by taking a large number of victims with him.''

In laying out his case, Mr. Bush said Iraq's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction was a danger to the Middle East, and he denounced its human rights abuses.

''It is important that the president argued that Saddam's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction creates a threat to the entire region and that Saddam has created a human rights catastrophe,'' said Kenneth M. Pollack, a former C.I.A. expert on Iraq now at the Brookings Institution.

''There is still skepticism around the world that Saddam would give weapons of mass of destruction to terrorists,'' Mr. Pollack said. ''So it is important that this is not the only argument.''

The speech tonight was a logical extension of Mr. Bush's address last year, in which he indicated the United States would not limit the fight against terrorism to governments that actively supported and harbored terrorists like the Taliban, but would also carry it to hostile states developing weapons of mass destruction.

In that speech Mr. Bush first declared that the United States was threatened by an ''axis of evil'' that included Iraq, Iran and North Korea.

Critics argued that the concept grouped together nations who were not allies and actually had little in common and that United States policies toward those nations would necessarily have to differ. By grouping them together, they said, Mr. Bush had inadvertently invited criticism that his foreign policy was inconsistent.

If the United States believes that rogue states are such a danger, why was it moving against Iraq and not Iran, which has stronger ties with terrorist groups and is also trying to develop nuclear weapons, critics asked. And why is Washington so patient with North Korea, which has a track record of selling missiles?

With Mr. Bush seeking to avoid a confrontation with North Korea and Iran even as he is trying to marshal a force for striking Iraq, he did not mention the ''axis of evil'' again. Instead, he suggested that Iran was going through a period of internal ferment and possibly change. Regarding North Korea, he stressed that the United States wanted to work with its allies to achieve a peaceful solution.

But Mr. Bush made it clear that the United States was determined to confront Iraq if it did not voluntarily disarm and would do so soon. In keeping with his doctrine of pre-emption, he indicated that Washington was prepared to act even in the face of allied objections and without explicit Security Council approval.

''We are asking them to join us, and many are doing so,'' Mr. Bush said of the allies. ''Yet the course of this nation does not depend on the decisions of others.''
Correction: Jan. 31, 2003
A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about President Bush's State of the Union speech misstated the name of the commandant of the Marine Corps, who attended with other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He is Gen. Michael W. Hagee. (Gen. James L. Jones is a former commandant.)

Correction: Jan. 31, 2003
A picture caption on Wednesday with an article about President Bush's State of the Union speech misstated the name of the commandant of the Marine Corps, who attended with other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He is Gen. Michael W. Hagee. (Gen. James L. Jones is a former commandant.)
