
THREATS AND RESPONSES: TOWARD A RESOLUTION; U.S. AND FRANCE NEAR COMPROMISE ON ACTION ON IRAQ
By Steven R. Weisman
Oct. 30, 2002


The United States and France are moving toward a compromise on Iraq that would oblige the Bush administration to consult the United Nations Security Council before embarking on military action against Saddam Hussein but still leave it the freedom to act alone.

American officials and foreign diplomats said that under the proposed compromise, the United States would take part in a Security Council debate if Iraq failed to comply with expected new United Nations demands for the destruction of its chemical and biological weapons.

For six weeks now, to the growing irritation and impatience of President Bush, France and the United States have been arguing over how many resolutions and what sort of triggers would be needed to open the way for United Nations-backed military action against Iraq. France has argued for two resolutions; the United States has balked.

In interviews published today in the daily newspapers Le Monde and The Financial Times and in other European publications, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell gave what administration officials described as the most explicit outline of the American compromise proposal.

Referring to French demands that the Security Council meet and decide on whether or not military action is needed in the event of Iraqi defiance over the coming weeks, Secretary Powell said, ''We essentially believe we have accommodated those who wanted an opportunity to decide this.''

He added, ''They have now the opportunity to decide or not to decide it, to pass a second resolution or offer a second resolution or not, and we will be part of that debate.''

Going further, the secretary told the European journalists that in a so-called second stage, ''We would certainly prefer to see the U.N. act in a multilateral way.''

But under the proposed compromise, American officials made clear that the United States would reserve the right to lead a military action against Iraq if Iraq continued to block inspections, even if the Security Council did not give its approval.

Administration officials stressed that Secretary Powell told the European reporters that the United States would not be ''handcuffed'' by the United Nations if it failed to authorize force.

Nevertheless, the new promise to consult Security Council members before any military action appears to have gone some way toward reassuring the French.

''We are much closer to an agreement than we were a week ago,'' said a French official, adding that the United States seemed to be making every effort to win French, Russian and Chinese approval of a resolution on Iraq. Each of the five permanent members of the Security Council -- the United States, France, Britain, Russia and China -- has veto power.

Although the proposal falls short of French demands, the administration's assurances that it would at least give the Security Council a role, including a chance to debate the issue and pass a second resolution, has been welcomed by France and other nations.

The gesture could also help to break the impasse holding up a first resolution sending inspectors into Iraq, according to American officials and foreign diplomats.

Administration officials said they were hopeful that an agreement on the resolution's wording could come as early as Friday, but that most likely it would be next week. Secretary Powell said today that ''we're hard at work, and I think we're getting closer'' to a compromise on a resolution on Iraq.

He spoke twice by telephone in the early morning with Kofi Annan, the secretary general of the United Nations, bringing him up to date on the progress of the negotiations, the officials said.

Mr. Annan has warned that it could be very damaging to the United Nations if the negotiations collapse and the United States goes outside the organization to lead a war against Iraq. He is anxious to assist in breaching the gap between Washington and Paris, United Nations officials said.

While voicing some optimism, however, the administration has kept up public warnings that time is running out for the United Nations to agree on an inspections measure. Mr. Bush has asserted several times in recent days that the United States will act against Iraq if the United Nations does not.

Secretary Powell said that within ''days or a week'' Mr. Bush might press for a vote and take subsequent action if it lost.

France has taken the lead in negotiating with the United States on the Iraqi resolution. Administration officials say they expect China and Russia to be guided by what the French decide.

The French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, told a newspaper in Paris this week that France had garnered support among a majority of the 15 nations on the Security Council for its so-called two-stage approach.

The compromise now being neared would leave enough ambiguity about what exactly those two stages would consist of to satisfy both France and the United States.

But some other differences remain. Another contentious issue in the draft resolution is the use of two crucial words, ''material breach,'' to describe Iraq's past and potential future rebuffs of weapons inspections.

In an earlier draft, the United States had insisted on using these words to describe how a future Iraqi rebuff of inspections would be viewed.

French diplomats said that using such a phrase to describe future hypothetical actions by Iraq amounted to an ''automatic trigger'' for using force.

Mr. Villepin, the French foreign minister, said that since there was an agreement on a second United Nations meeting to consider what to do about a possible future Iraqi violation of the inspections measure, ''no new mechanisms circumventing the approach should be added to the text presented by the United States.''

France wants the words ''material breach'' to be included to describe past and current actions by Iraq, but not future hypothetical ones. The United States wants it to apply to both.

At a Pentagon news conference, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf, indicated today that the United States did not need a United Nations Security Council resolution to win allied support for an American-led campaign to eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.

General Franks said the Bush administration's preference would be to work within a Security Council resolution, but failing that, the United States has enough regional and international support to lead a coalition to oust President Hussein and disarm Iraq.

''The best case for us is to be able, as the president carried the case back in September to the United Nations, to be able to build our force list, our coalition, based on work by the Security Council,'' General Franks said.

But General Franks quickly added, ''I will say that my sense, visiting the region -- and I mentioned that I had just come back -- my sense is that we have a great many friends, partners and allies who see the situation the same way we do.''

In a brief interview afterward, General Franks said the United States had not yet formally requested the use of bases, overflight rights or other support from countries in the Middle East and Southwest Asia.

But he said he and other American officials had held numerous talks with allies to let them know what Washington might need should Mr. Bush order an offensive against Iraq.

Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, today to attend a joint planning committee meeting with other American officials and their Saudi counterparts. Also at the talks were Peter Rodman, the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs; the American ambassador, Bob Jordan; and Lincoln Bloomfield, the assistant secretary of state for political-military affairs.

Pentagon officials said General Myers made no formal requests for logistical or military support from the Saudis, or from officials in Bahrain earlier in his trip.
