
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; 11 Million Voters Say the Iraqi President Is Perfect
By John F. Burns
Oct. 17, 2002


Iraq said today that Saddam Hussein had scored a perfect 100 percent of the 11.4 million votes cast in a presidential referendum on Tuesday, thus securing -- from a field that consisted only of himself -- a further seven years as Iraq's leader. In the process, he sought to deliver a warning to the United States of the popular resistance it would face if it stages a military invasion.

''The Iraqi people have said 'no' to the American threats, and they have affirmed that they are ready to take part in the battle, if it comes,'' said Izzat Ibrahim, an Iraqi vice president who is formally ranked as the most powerful man in the country after Mr. Hussein. Mr. Ibrahim, who is also deputy supreme commander of Iraq's armed forces, under Mr. Hussein, added that if American troops invade, they would be ''no match'' for Iraqis in a ground war.

''If the U.S. administration makes a mistake and attacks Iraq, we will fight them,'' Mr. Ibrahim said at a three-hour news conference called to announce the referendum result. ''I don't think they can match us in a land battle. But if they come, we will fight them in every village, and every house. Every house will be a front, and every Iraqi will have a role in the war. Even a shepherd's boy will have a role to play. They are armed, and they will fight.''

Mr. Hussein has made only rare public appearances in recent years, and he remained out of sight today, as he did throughout the referendum campaign, which offered Iraq's 22 million people no choice other than voting ''yes'' and ''no'' on extending Mr. Hussein's 23 years of absolute power. In the many international crises that have marked his rule, the Iraqi leader's secretive ways have often served the purpose of leaving adversaries outside Iraq in doubt as to his intentions.

Taken at face value, the referendum result amounted to the most extraordinary electoral performance ever claimed by one of the Arab world's autocratic leaders. Other Arab leaders, including President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, have claimed popular mandates of close to 100 percent, and Mr. Hussein was competing against his own benchmark of 99.96 percent from the last presidential referendum in 1995.

At least arithmetically, the 1995 result meant that about 3,600 Iraqis voted ''no,'' or spoiled their ballots. Today's result, taken literally, meant that not one of the 11,425,638 voters, the figure given by Mr. Ibrahim, had voted against Mr. Hussein. Although Iraqi officials added another astonishing claim, that 100 percent of the registered voters had turned out, they did not explain why the official turnout did not match the figure of 11,758,900 voters given in official handouts before the vote.

Mr. Ibrahim, whose formal title is vice chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, seemed aware that the result might meet with incredulity, and even mockery, in some parts of the world. But he insisted that the 100 percent mandate and claimed turnout among eligible voters was a ''true'' figure from a carefully scrutinized count.

The 100 percent mandate, Mr. Ibrahim said, ''represents a truth that has always been there. It reflects the intimate relationship that exists between the Iraqi people's great leader and the people.'' Besides, he said, the result was the only possible outcome given Iraqis' ''allegiance'' to Mr. Hussein, and the popular indignation generated by American threats to depose him.

He added: ''Why would anybody say 'no' to Saddam Hussein? He is the symbol of our freedom, and of our future. The only person Iraqis want to say 'no' to is George W. Bush.''

Among ordinary Iraqis today, the threat of war was momentarily set aside for street demonstrations celebrating Mr. Hussein's triumph. A national holiday was declared, and the 100 percent mandate for Mr. Hussein, however it may have been viewed in the privacy of Iraqis' homes and consciences, was the occasion for noisy demonstrations of loyalty to the Iraqi leader.

As the counting neared completion on Tuesday night, fireworks lit up the vast array of monuments and statues of Mr. Hussein that are Baghdad's most prominent architectural feature. From dawn on, men took to the street to fire guns into the air.

With Mr. Hussein remaining out of sight, the regime produced Mr. Ibrahim, a balding man in his early 60's who is regarded as a wily strategist and one of only a handful of men with real influence on Mr. Hussein.

While warning the United States of the resistance it would meet if it invades, he was careful to say that Iraq still hoped to avoid war by accepting weapons inspectors and convincing them that Iraq no longer has programs to develop nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

The Bush administration has demanded an end to Iraq's years of evading weapons inspections, and also called for a ''regime change'' in Baghdad, meaning the ouster of Mr. Hussein. But plans for weapons inspectors to resume work in Iraq have been deferred while American diplomats seek to resolve an impasse with France and Russia on the United Nations Security Council over a new resolution that will serve as mandate for the inspectors.

Iraq has invited Hans Blix, the chief United Nations weapons inspector, to send a team to Baghdad to make preliminary arrangements for a new round of inspections on Oct. 19. But that plan has been set aside pending the outcome of the talks in New York, and could be further complicated if Iraq refuses new conditions Washington is seeking to include in the mandate, including the right to inspect, at no notice, Mr. Hussein's palaces in Baghdad and other locations across Iraq.

At the news conference, Mr. Ibrahim was asked whether Iraq would accept the new American conditions if they were included in a Security Council resolution. But he parried the question, saying that Iraq had agreed to all the terms set by Mr. Blix in negotiations two weeks ago in Vienna that were based on earlier United Nations resolutions.

The United States has described those resolutions as inadequate.

''We have reached an agreement with the United Nations that includes very detailed, provisions for furthering the work of the weapons inspectors,'' Mr. Ibrahim said. ''If the Security Council passes a resolution that sets conditions other than those we have accepted, that will be something else, and we will deal with it only then.''

He added that Iraq was counting on France and Russia, Iraq's ''traditional friends,'' to protect Iraq's interests, and to handle the talks in New York in a way that prevented war. The Baghdad government's conviction that it is riding a wave of international support was a major theme. ''The world has abandoned America; it has become isolated,'' Mr. Ibrahim said.

He offered advice to Western skeptics of today's result, saying they would err if they judged it from their own experience. ''Don't evaluate this from an intellectual viewpoint, or make comparisons from your experience in the West; Iraq is quite different.''

Drawing an analogy likely to raise eyebrows in the Islamic world, he said, ''The condition of Iraq is like that of early Islamic societies,'' when there was no divide between the leaders and their followers.

The implication was that Mr. Hussein was akin to the early caliphs of Islam, who were relatives or descendants of the Prophet Muhammad, founder of the Islamic faith in the 7th century A.D. in the deserts of what is now Saudi Arabia. Claims that Mr. Hussein is descended from the prophet's family have been made by Iraqi government propagandists for years, prompting Islamic scholars outside Iraq to accuse the Baghdad government of sacrilege.
