
THREATS AND RESPONSES: WASHINGTON; France and China Rebuff Bush On Support for Early Iraq War
By Richard W. Stevenson
Feb. 8, 2003

The leaders of France and China rebuffed efforts by President Bush today to line up support for the use of force against Iraq within the next month or two. Their continuing resistance made clear the difficulty the White House faces in its attempt to win explicit new authorization from the United Nations Security Council for military action.

A day after he said he was open to pursuing a new Council resolution, Mr. Bush said that the 15-member Security Council would have to decide soon and that he was confident it would uphold ''to the fullest'' its previous demands that Saddam Hussein's government disarm.

But after phone conversations with Mr. Bush today, President Jacques Chirac of France and President Jiang Zemin of China both signaled that they wanted United Nations weapons inspections to continue for some time before they would support war. The French ambassador to the United States, Jean-David Levitte, told reporters here that by his nation's count, there were 10 or 11 Security Council members in favor of giving the inspectors more time.

The administration showed no signs of deviating from its timetable of forcing a showdown within ''weeks, not months,'' as Mr. Bush put it last week. But British and American diplomats began considering language and options for a new United Nations resolution, while the military buildup in the region continued, with the Pentagon sending a fifth aircraft carrier, the Kitty Hawk, to the Persian Gulf.

During a visit to American forces based at Aviano Air Force Base in Italy, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said the length of any war was unknowable, but then went on to estimate that it could be ''six days, six weeks, I doubt six months.''

On a day when the administration put the United States on high alert for terrorist attacks, the State Department issued further travel warnings for Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and Israel. It also authorized the voluntary departure of dependents and nonemergency personnel at the United States embassies in those countries at government expense.

Administration officials said their efforts to line up international support for Mr. Bush's hard line against Mr. Hussein were benefiting from Secretary of State Colin L. Powell's presentation to the Security Council on Wednesday of previously classified evidence against Iraq.

But Iraqi officials, continuing a counteroffensive against the American claims, showed reporters a ballistic missile site 50 miles west of Baghdad that had been singled out by Mr. Powell. They sought to prove that features of the site Mr. Powell had presented as ominous had more benign explanations.

In Britain, Prime Minister Tony Blair's government was forced to acknowledge that it had lifted parts of its most recent Iraq report from magazines and academic journals.

In Moscow, the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, said the crisis had entered a ''very crucial phase,'' and urged Iraq to cooperate more actively with the weapons inspectors. But he said his government continued to believe that the matter could be resolved with ''political tools'' rather than military action.

At the White House, officials said Mr. Bush and his aides intended to spend the next two weeks focusing on diplomacy to bring together as broad and united an international front as possible for moving militarily against Iraq. But mindful of the potential political costs to the president of appearing wholly focused on foreign policy at a time of domestic economic weakness, they said Mr. Bush and his top aides would simultaneously undertake a public relations campaign in favor of the president's tax cut proposals.

Speaking to reporters outside the Treasury Department, Mr. Bush challenged the Security Council to follow up on the resolution it adopted unanimously in November, No. 1441, with another resolution calling for the use of force if Iraq continues to obstruct the inspections.

''This is a defining moment for the U.N. Security Council,'' he said. ''If the Security Council were to allow a dictator to lie and deceive, the Security Council will be weakened.''

Mr. Bush went on to say that ''the U.N. Security Council's got to make up its mind, soon, as to whether or not its words mean anything.'' But he then restated his position that Resolution 1441 provided him with all the authorization he needed to take military action in any case.

''I have said that if Saddam Hussein does not disarm, we will lead a coalition to disarm him,'' he said. ''And I mean it.''

Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said the diplomatic process of seeking support for a new resolution and trying to reach agreement on the specific language ''is now just beginning,'' and he suggested that there was flexibility in the administration's position about how the resolution might read.

''What you are seeing here is a serious diplomatic effort under way, and it's going to continue,'' Mr. Fleischer said. He said the opinions of other world leaders would matter to Mr. Bush. ''But make no mistake,'' he said. ''He will also lead.''

If his efforts at diplomacy today were any indication, Mr. Bush faces a difficult selling job with France and China, both of which can veto Security Council resolutions.

After Mr. Jiang's 20-minute phone call with Mr. Bush this morning, the official Chinese news agency said Mr. Jiang had pointed out ''that the two U.N. weapons inspections organizations in Iraq had made some progress'' and that ''support should be given to the two U.N. organizations in the strengthening of the weapons inspections.''

Mr. Jiang had spoken earlier in the day to Mr. Chirac, pledging support for continued weapons inspections and telling the French leader that all efforts should be made to avoid a war, Chinese news agencies said.

Even before Mr. Bush spoke to Mr. Chirac, French officials made clear that they would resist Mr. Bush's pressure. A day after Mr. Bush said, ''the game is over,'' Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin told reporters during a trip to New Delhi: ''It's not a game. It's not over.''

Speaking in Paris today, Mr. Chirac said, ''France considers that in between the inspection arrangements as they exist now and war, there are many, many ways to disarm Iraq. We have still not gone to the end -- far from it.''

After the call between Mr. Bush and Mr. Chirac, a French official said it was an ''excellent conversation'' that nonetheless did not produce a meeting of minds. Both leaders said they would agree to disagree, this official said, adding that Mr. Chirac said, ''We respect the American position.''

According to the official, Mr. Chirac spent part of the call simply explaining the French position to Mr. Bush, saying it was best that each side understood the other's position.

France's position continued today to be that it would not rule out backing a resolution authorizing force against Iraq, but only when it became clear that the inspections process would no longer work.

''Let's wait for the report of the inspectors,'' Ambassador Levitte said, referring to the report next Friday. He said that if they said they were at a ''dead end,'' a decision on using force would be discussed.

Mr. Levitte said the French view on this was supported by 10 or 11 members of the Security Council, enough to block a resolution. But American diplomats said they thought that they had a good chance of getting the nine votes necessary to adopt a resolution, with the possibility that France, Russia and China might go along or at least not exercise their veto.

Mr. Fleischer said the administration's goal was not necessarily another unanimous Council vote. ''Nobody has said that that is a standard that must be set,'' he said, noting that Germany, a Council member, is strongly opposed to a war.
