

In Talk With Envoy, Bush Assails Hussein, but Saudis Are Firm in Opposing War
By David E. Sanger
Aug. 28, 2002


President Bush told Saudi Arabia's ambassador to the United States today that Saddam Hussein was ''a menace and a threat'' to both his Middle East neighbors and the United States. But after a meeting that lasted several hours, Saudi officials said their position was unchanged -- that war was not acceptable and they would not cooperate in any military action.

Mr. Bush's meeting with Prince Bandar bin Sultan, the longtime Saudi ambassador and a friend of the Bush family since before the Persian Gulf war in 1991, followed a speech by Vice President Dick Cheney on Monday in which he made the strongest case yet that military action was the only realistic choice to remove Mr. Hussein from power.

But the White House said Prince Bandar was told by Mr. Bush that he had still made no decision about whether the United States should proceed with a military overthrow of the Iraqi government.

A few administration officials -- including some who fear that administration hawks are trying to press the president into making a decision -- suggested privately that the vehemence of Mr. Cheney's language had taken them by surprise.

Prince Bandar came and left Crawford without making any comments, and reporters were kept miles from the session. But after it was over, a Saudi spokesman, Adel al-Jubeir, made the rounds of television shows and reporters to make it clear that the Saudi position about how to deal with Mr. Hussein was unchanged.

''There is a process under way with the U.N. to bring the inspectors back in,'' he said, speaking in Washington. ''If it is successful, we can achieve our objectives without firing a single bullet or losing a single life.''

''There is no country I know of supporting the use of force in Iraq at this time,'' he added, and said that ''the rhetoric about using force is way ahead of the policy.''

It was unclear this evening whether Mr. Cheney's comments on Monday meant the administration was no longer interested in getting weapons inspectors back into Iraq, as the Saudis and others insist. The United States ambassador to the United Nations, John Negroponte, said today that the United States was still interested if inspectors had ''unfettered and unconditional access,'' though he cautioned that ''Iraq's track record in the past in this regard has not been a particularly encouraging one.''

''But if they were to cooperate fully with an international inspection regime,'' he said, ''that could be an important part of the resolution of this question of disarming Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction.''

The State Department -- where many administration officials argue that it would be deeply damaging to American interests to begin military action without the support of European and Arab allies -- made it clear today that it was not yet trying to rally support behind a war plan.

''There are no war drums to beat,'' said Richard Boucher, the State Department spokesman. He added that within the administration, ''there has been a certain amount of debate and discussion about how to deal with'' the threat Iraq posed. ''But as the White House has made clear, the president has not decided. So there's no option to enlist people's support for, there's no war drum to beat, there's no particular action that we're trying to sell right now.''

Today's session at Mr. Bush's 1,600-acre ranch was clearly part of a broader effort to repair strained relations with the Saudis. On Monday, the Saudis disclosed today, Mr. Bush called Crown Prince Abdullah, the de facto Saudi leader, to assure him that the administration did not agree with a private sector analyst who urged the Defense Policy Board, an advisory panel to the Pentagon, to recommend that Saudi Arabia be subjected to sanctions if it did not crack down on terrorism. The administration has been disavowing the recommendation ever since it became public.

Prince Bandar was given the full ranch treatment today, bringing several of his children along for a lunch of grilled chicken, biscuits and Mediterranean salad, and then going with his visitors on a tour of the property.

Nonetheless, several contentious issues came up in the hourlong private meeting between Mr. Bush and Prince Bandar, who is widely considered one of the best-connected ambassadors in Washington.

The White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said Mr. Bush raised a specific case involving child abduction, urging Saudi Arabia to free Amjad Radwan, a 19-year-old American woman who was taken to Saudi territory by her father as a child and is not permitted to leave without her father's written permission. Saudi courts almost always rule in favor of Saudi fathers in child custody cases like this one that involve non-Saudi mothers. But until today Mr. Bush had never raised the subject directly.

Mr. Fleischer said a decision was made to have the president get involved in the case today because ''not enough progress has been made, because people have not been allowed to come back to the United States who ought to be able to.''

Mr. Bush also pressed the Saudis to make good on their pledge of financial help to the new Afghan government. But Mr. Bush apparently made no effort to press for broader democratic change in Saudi Arabia, despite his frequent discussion of the need for democracy in Iraq. It was a significant omission because Mr. Bush has used the argument about democratizing the Arab world to explain why he is pressing for replacing the current leadership in Iraq, though he has rarely discussed it in terms of his nondemocratic Arab allies.

The Iraqi leader clearly senses an opportunity to try to separate the United States from its Arab allies, and today he told Qatar's foreign minister that an American assault on Iraq would be an attack on ''all the Arab nations,'' the official Iraqi News Agency reported.

Egypt's president, Hosni Mubarak, an important American ally, said in Cairo that ''if you strike at the Iraqi people because of one or two individuals and leave the Palestinian issue'' unresolved, ''not a single ruler'' in the Arab world ''will be able to curb the popular sentiments.''

The White House insisted today that the discussion of Iraq was general, and Mr. Fleischer said that Mr. Bush ''listens carefully to the thoughts that people have about how to deal with Iraq.''

''He hears them say and agree with him that Saddam Hussein is a threat, that Saddam Hussein is a menace,' Mr. Fleischer said. ''And then the president makes his case why the world would be better off without Saddam Hussein there.''

But White House officials know that the effort would be vastly easier with Saudi political and tactical help.

''I don't see how you do this war without the Saudis, or at least making an effort to get them aboard,'' said Michael O'Hanlon, a scholar at the Brookings Institution who has written extensively about Iraq. ''Access to Saudi Arabia is critical. It's one thing to bomb Iraq for a few days, for symbolic purpose. But in a war designed to overthrow Saddam, you need to hit him from as many places as possible.''

Saudi officials have made it clear, however, that they regard this conflict with Iraq in entirely different terms than the way they regarded the gulf war. They argue that Mr. Cheney had it wrong on Monday when he said that with Mr. Hussein's ouster extremists in the region would be on the run, moderates would be on the rise, and the chances of peace between Israel and the Palestinians would be enhanced.

''Our view is that you have to settle the other issues first,'' a Saudi official said today.
