
'Baghdad' Looks Back And Ahead
By Bill Carter
Nov. 18, 2002


When HBO began shooting ''Live From Baghdad,'' its film about CNN's coverage of the Persian Gulf war, it had reasonable expectations that the tensions in the Middle East would underscore the continued relevance of a decade-old story.

Now the film, which will have its debut on HBO on Dec. 7, has the eerie, through-the-looking-glass quality of a tale that looks forward and back at the same time. As its star, Michael Keaton, put it, ''It's beyond spooky.''

HBO executives have been touting the film for some time for its inside account of how a band of scruffy, high-energy, low-paid producers and reporters carved out a slice of journalism history for themselves by providing the only live coverage of the outbreak of war in the Persian Gulf in 1991.

But with a second gulf war possibly only weeks or months away, the channel's timing is fortuitous. Not that it was entirely accidental. Mick Jackson, the film's director, noted that the film was originally scheduled for February or March, at a point when the bombs might have already fallen again.

It made sense to bump it up to December -- not normally a month for high-profile television projects -- because, as Mr. Jackson put it, ''It is so scarily relevant to what is happening now.''

Mr. Keaton, who has been in on the release of many big Hollywood movies, including two ''Batman'' films, noted that the usual frame of reference is to try to beat the opening of a competing blockbuster movie. ''Here,'' he said, ''we're trying to beat the invasion.''

Still, the film was hardly rushed into production. Mr. Jackson said he saw a first script more than a decade ago. Then as now it was based on the book by Robert Wiener, the CNN producer who led the coverage from Baghdad, and whose character is central to the action.

Mr. Wiener, 56, was accustomed to being in the center during a long television career that began in Vietnam and concluded a year ago when he retired from CNN to write full time.

Speaking by telephone from the houseboat on the Seine near Paris, where he now lives, Mr. Wiener expressed satisfaction in how his story has finally come out, after many years of false starts.

He wrote an early draft that went through countless revisions as directors and stars passed through the project, which was then planned as a theatrical movie. Early on, Barry Levinson was attached as director, with Dustin Hoffman lined up to play Mr. Wiener. Other directors dipped in for a look, including Penny Marshall and Harold Ramis.

Those choices reflected the tone that the scripts were taking at the time: much more comic than faithful to the facts. Mr. Wiener said he did not recognize the story after a while. The project sat in limbo for about seven years but was revived two years ago after Mr. Wiener met some HBO producers, who had been tracking the project for some time, on the set of the mini-series ''Band of Brothers.''

After bringing in Mr. Jackson, whose background is in documentary filmmaking, and restoring elements of Mr. Wiener's original draft, HBO's version now looks enough like what really happened that some of those who participated, like the former CNN anchor Bernard Shaw, have found it disconcertingly real in many of its details.

Mr. Shaw said he had been invited to the set. ''I found myself back in Suite 906 of the Al Rashid Hotel,'' he said. ''It sent a chill through me.''

Admitting that it was ''certainly a bit odd'' to see an actor (Robert Wisdom) playing him, Mr. Shaw confessed that he had found the HBO version ''compellingly told.''

Actors take the parts of Richard Roth, Peter Arnett and John Holliman, CNN correspondents, as well as CNN executives like Tom Johnson, Ed Turner and Eason Jordan. Mr. Keaton said he had it easier portraying a behind-the-scenes figure like Mr. Wiener.

The faintly absurdist gung-ho journalistic style that colleagues said Mr. Wiener affected, played into Mr. Keaton's strengths for both intensity and comic edge in his acting. ''This is the kind of stuff I like,'' he said.

Helena Bonham Carter plays Ingrid Formanek, Mr. Wiener's long-time producing partner and, at least in the film, quasi-romantic interest. It is one of the places the script still takes liberties, Mr. Wiener said, including one conversation in which the characters discuss whether they had ever been lovers on a drunken night together. ''If I ever asked that of Ingrid,'' Mr. Wiener said, ''she would have told me, 'If you'd been with me, baby, you'd remember.' ''

The film's other crucial relationship is between Mr. Wiener and the Iraqi minister of information, Naji al-Hadithi. The two men become brothers of a sort. Mr. Keaton credited David Suchet, famous for portraying Hercule Poirot, with a performance of such subtle grace that the relationship becomes the key to ''comprehending the humanity that exists on both sides.''

Mr. Hadithi, now the foreign minister of Iraq, was the critical link for CNN in gaining special access during the war and especially in the acquisition of a piece of transmission equipment known as a ''four-wire,'' which kept CNN on the air, alone among the news organizations of the world, during the first night's bombardment.

Mr. Wiener said the portrayal of the two men's interaction is accurate. ''And we maintain a good relationship,'' he said.

Other CNN executives said the film gives Mr. Wiener too much credit and that most credit rightfully belongs to Mr. Jordan, then and now CNN's leading hard news executive, who was unrelenting in seeking the right to use the four-wire.

The film was shot in Casablanca and desert areas of Morocco, a great advantage both for verisimilitude as stand-in for Baghdad and the Kuwaiti desert, and for access to whatever the filmmakers needed at reasonable prices, Mr. Jackson said. ''They'd say: 'You want a tank? A tank is 179 bucks. We got planes, whatever you want.' ''

Still, an HBO executive said it cost about $20 million to make the film, about four times the cost of many television movies.

Though HBO and CNN are divisions of AOL Time Warner, ''CNN had no input into the movie,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''The idea was to make it big. Open with tanks. Show what it was like from inside that hotel room when the bombs were falling.''

Mr. Shaw remembers that moment as being as close to death as he has been. ''I had made my peace,'' he said, adding that even if the bombardment did not get the CNN crew, he feared that at any moment uncontrollable elements in the military might ''burst through the door and summarily execute us.''

The CNN crew was told that the White House had advised all journalists to leave Baghdad because it could not guarantee their safety. Tom Johnson, newly installed as CNN president, ordered his staff to leave.

Mr. Wiener noted that the CNN founder, Ted Turner, overruled that order, saying he would take the responsibility for anyone who wanted to risk it. (Mr. Turner is mentioned in the film, not portrayed.)

Everyone involved expects the circumstances to be much different, and much more dangerous, a second time around. ''This time the Iraqis are going to be much more concerned with their own survival than keeping CNN on the air,'' Mr. Wiener said.

Still, the pressure will be on for CNN to try to duplicate this moment in its history.

''I hope that CNN's producers and correspondents don't put themselves under undue pressure to equal or surpass gulf '91,'' Mr. Shaw said. ''When you're aggressive you take risks and sometimes you suffer the consequences. This war will be different.''
