
THREATS AND RESPONSES: ALLIANCES; U.S. Is Wooing A Shiite Exile To Rattle Iraq
By Michael R. Gordon
Nov. 25, 2002


An Iranian-backed ayatollah may seem an unlikely ally for the Bush administration. But consider Ayatollah Muhammad Bakir al-Hakim.

The ayatollah is an Iraqi Shiite who has been living in Tehran for more than two decades. He is backed by the Iranian government, the one that President Bush has derided as part of an ''axis of evil.'' His father once gave sanctuary to Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the fiery anti-American cleric who later rose to power in Iran's 1979 revolution.

Still, the United States and the Shiite cleric are in the process of forging a political alliance of convenience. It is an arrangement that is strongly supported by Kuwait, Washington's staunchest Arab ally in its campaign to dislodge President Saddam Hussein.

The alliance is also quietly backed by Tehran, a subtle signal that Iran seems prepared to offer a modicum of cooperation if the Bush administration mounts a military campaign in Iraq.

''Our job right now is to change the current regime,'' Ayatollah Hakim said in an interview here. ''It is very important that there be an understanding between the Iraqi opposition and the United States.''

The Bush administration appears to agree. The ayatollah received a letter this week from Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz and three other ranking Bush administration officials asking him to send a representative to a Dec. 10 meeting of Iraqi opposition leaders in London.

The purpose of the session is to endorse a set of democratic principles for governing Iraq if Mr. Hussein is deposed, and to commit the successor government to destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. Opposition leaders would also be asked to reaffirm Iraq's territorial integrity.

The reason the Bush administration would like Shiites at that meeting is clear. While Iraq has been dominated by the Sunni Muslim minority, an estimated 55 percent of Iraqis are Shiites.

The Bush administration not only wants to demonstrate that it has broad support among Iraq's diverse array of opposition groups, but also wants to encourage a new governing structure: a system in which Shiites would be represented but in which fundamentalist Islam would not become the dominant ideology.

Advertising Washington's concern for Iraq's Shiites could also facilitate an American military intervention as well. Much of Baghdad is populated by Shiites, and they also dominate southern Iraq, the principal invasion route that American forces would take if they moved on the capital.

Ayatollah Hakim was one of nine Iraqi opposition leaders who received the letter from the Bush team and one of two Shiites. The other Shiite is Mohammed Bahr al-Eloom, a moderate cleric based in London.

The ayatollah's movement is called the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Resolution in Iraq. Aides said the organization planned to open an office in Washington soon.

Even so, there seem to be strains between Ayatollah Hakim and the Americans that he does not seem at pains to hide. The Bush administration, for example, is eager to obtain the ayatollah's political support but, he noted, has not indicated any interest in forging a military alliance with the Badr brigade, the ayatollah's guerrilla army, numbering several thousand. Experts say it is trained, equipped and influenced by the Revolutionary Guard of Iran.

The ayatollah seems prepared to work with Washington if an American invasion enables him to secure a place in a new power structure in Iraq, but he would like to see American forces leave as soon as possible.

''Iraqis are able to manage their own lives,'' Ayatollah Hakim said. ''I see no need for American forces to remain in Iraq because no external forces threaten Iraq.''

Ayatollah Hakim is the son of one of Iraq's great Shiite religious leaders, the late grand ayatollah Muhsin al-Hakim, and used to live in Najaf, a city in southern Iraq. His following was brutally suppressed by Mr. Hussein and more than two dozen family members were killed. The cleric fled to Syria and, eventually, to Iran.

The ayatollah is a cordial host with a gentle smile. But he still is bitter about the first President Bush's decision not to come to the aid of the Shiites after the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

When the Iraqi Army was routed, the Shiites in the south rebelled. But President George Bush decided not to intervene.

A difficult situation became worse when, as part of the cease-fire arrangements, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf acceded to the Iraqi military's request that their pilots be allowed to operate helicopters. The Iraqi military later used helicopters to attack and kill Shiites.

General Schwarzkopf complained that he had been duped, but Washington did not impose a no-flight zone in southern Iraq for more than a year. While many American experts see the episode as unfortunate case of postwar policy confusion, Ayatollah Hakim sees it as a dark conspiracy to keep the Shiites in their place.

The Americans, he said, ''helped the current regime against us.''

After the gulf war, there were occasional contacts between the ayatollah's movement and the Central Intelligence Agency, according to Iraqi opposition figures, but no real cooperation. That began to change as American policy shifted from containing Mr. Hussein's government to making military plans to destroy it.

Still, the relationship has not developed easily. After the current Bush administration invited the ayatollah to join other Iraqi opposition figures in Washington for a meeting in August, he initially demurred.

Just days before that meeting, Ahmad Chalabi, the head of the Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella group of opposition leaders, flew to Tehran to persuade the ayatollah to send a representative. The ayatollah sent his brother, who gave the Pentagon a report detailing what were said to be Iraqi plans to use poison gas to suppress Shiite rebellions.

A big question is just how much influence the ayatollah still has in Iraq and how much independence he has from the Iranian government. Ayatollah Hakim asserted that he did not coordinate his strategy with Tehran and that his main interest was protecting the rights of the Shiites in a new and democratic Iraq.

That claim is viewed skeptically by some experts. ''He is representing fundamentalist Islam, which does not allow any democracy,'' said Amatzia Baram, an expert on Iraq at the University of Haifa in Israel. ''And he is representing Iranian interests. Still, he should be included. Lots of people in Iraq know of him.''

Some experts say the ayatollah's Iran connection has a benefit. It gives Iran a stake in a future Iraqi government and helps encourage its neutrality or even cooperation if the United States attacks Iraq, said David Mack, a former State Department official. There have been other signs of Iranian cooperation, including moves by the Iranian Navy to close its territorial waters to smugglers going to and from Iraq.

In addition to the two Shiite leaders it asked to attend the London session, the Bush administration also sent messages to Mr. Chalabi; the Iraqi National Accord, an organization that includes former Baath Party members; a group that wants to restore the monarchy; the two leading Kurdish groups; and organizations that represent the Turkoman and Assyrian minorities in Iraq.

Kuwait, for its part, has encouraged the Bush administration to work with the ayatollah, who is a regular visitor to Kuwait.

Dr. Muhammad al-Sabah, Kuwait's minister of state for foreign affairs, said in an interview that Mr. Hussein's government cannot be reformed but that Washington would be wise to have a channel of communication with the Iraqi Shiite opposition groups and with Iran.

''We talked about the future of Kuwait and Iraq and how to bring back close relations,'' Dr. Sabah said after a recent meeting with the ayatollah here. ''He is a welcome personality in Kuwait.''
