
THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ'S NEIGHBOR; Shadow of Impending War Darkens Kuwaitis' Horizons
By Patrick E. Tyler
Jan. 31, 2003

Shaikha Ali Jaber al-Sabah says she is like other young, affluent Kuwaitis, living in ''la-la land,'' a surreal detachment that comes from playing host to a foreign army that has taken over one-third of Kuwait to prepare for an invasion of Iraq that many here find profoundly disturbing.

''I was driving to my grandmother's chalet the other day and I passed an American military convoy on the highway,'' said Ms. Sabah, 26, ''and I suddenly felt so isolated as if I did not matter; that my voice could not be heard; that I was powerless -- we here are powerless.''

As a member of the ruling Sabah family, Ms. Sabah said that she feels ''a heavy burden is on my shoulders'' to help hold the country together, to set an example of a positive outlook. But sipping cappuccinos at a beachfront restaurant called Le Notre, she confessed that she thinks ''George Bush is an idiot,'' and that America was about to inflict untold suffering on Iraqi civilians.

She does not support the ideology of Osama bin Laden, but she and her friend Dina Abdullah Marzook, a fellow college student who joined her for coffee, said they think Mr. bin Laden speaks more eloquently and with more charisma than any American leader.

More than a decade after the Persian Gulf war, this small emirate, which emerged from the Ottoman empire as an oasis of business-minded traders, pearl divers and oil magnates, is struggling with ambivalence toward its most important patron, the United States.

Desperate for its own long-term security and sympathetic to America's strategic quest to change the government in Baghdad, Kuwait has opened its doors and territory so Washington can have another shot at Saddam Hussein. But many Kuwaitis say their hearts are not in it. They ponder the danger of a high civilian toll and wonder if the Bush administration is ''trampling on our heads'' in the Arab world, as Ms. Sabah put it, for what Osama bin Laden did to America.

''We are not anti-American -- au contraire,'' she said.. Kuwaitis are grateful that America led the coalition that expelled Iraqi occupation forces from Kuwait in 1990 and 1991. Ms. Sabah said she would love to see Mr. Hussein captured, tortured and executed so that he would ''have a taste'' of the murder and rape that his army inflicted on the Kuwaitis, hundreds of whom are still missing.

But Mr. Hussein is now contained and, as a young Kuwaiti, Ms. Sabah, like many other Kuwaitis, is simply against war. ''War is ugly and horrible and at the same time a lot of people already are suffering in Iraq,'' she said. Why, she asked, can't the Central Intelligence Agency just get rid of Mr. Hussein and spare the region more suffering?

The last time the American Army massed in the desert here, many Kuwaitis were living in splendid refuge at four-star hotels across Saudi Arabia, and others watched the operation unfold on television from the ski slopes of Switzerland and Austria.

Today, many are staying home, where they have been instructed by the government to use plastic wrap and tape to prepare a ''safe room'' in each house that might withstand an onslaught of chemical weapons launched by the Iraqi leader. Many conversations with Kuwaitis are laced with uncertainty.

But as American tanks and artillery roll off ships in Kuwait's ports, cordoned off so that Islamic militants cannot shoot at them, many Kuwaitis are carrying on with a false sense of normalcy. One member of the ruling family, Sheik Muhammad al-Sabah, said some even feel a kind of ''suppressed euphoria.'' The stock market is soaring as merchants bet that a transformed Iraq will ignite an era of prosperity. Land prices near the Iraqi border have shot up.

''To me, the uncertainties are substantially less than there were last time,'' he said.

The Parliament, reinstated by the ruling family after the gulf war in a long-running experiment with democracy, is trying to bring down the government over finance and tax policy. Women, who play a far greater role in business and government than women in Saudi Arabia, are agitating for the right to vote.

The emir, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, is frail at 75, having just celebrated 25 years in power. The crown prince, Sheik Saad al-Abdullah al-Sabah, is in failing health. With huge oil wealth, the government, under the control of the ruling family, is the largest employer and, for that reason, there is a sense of fragility here with many Kuwaitis expressing fears that war could unhinge the status quo.

Still, when the weekend comes, much of the population shucks its worries and flees to the desert, where Kuwaitis feast on barbecued lamb and chicken, play cards through the cool nights and warm their tents with kerosene heaters.

New Yorkers have their lox and bagels with the Sunday papers on the hillocks of Central Park, but in Kuwait, many people feel the pull of the wide open spaces.

''I am free here, I can do anything I want,'' said Abdulrahman al-Husseinan, 19, who has been camping out with friends since early December, when the Muslim holy month of Ramadan ended. If he could join the army and fight with the Americans he would, he said. But the Kuwaiti Army is not expected to play a role.

Awakened at noon by a visitor, Mr. Husseinan explained that life here moved at a slower pace. ''The boys like to sleep and eat, play cards and smoke the hubbly bubbly'' water pipes, he said. ''It is like a habit for us. In the summer we go to the sea, and in the winter we go camping.''

No campsite was ever so well equipped. Here a typical weekend getaway camp has a satellite dish and a large-screen television run on electrical current provided by gasoline-driven generators. If that sounds noisy, the whir of the generators cannot even be heard over the din of motorbikes and all-terrain vehicles, known even in Arabic as ''buggies.''

''Imagine that we come to the desert for peace and quiet, and now all you hear in the desert are these motorcycles,'' said Sheik Muhammad al-Sabah, whose desert domain is in Wafra, the oasis near Kuwait's border with Saudi Arabia.

But with the northern third of the country sealed off to provide a sprawling base for United States military forces, the national pastime -- leisure and holiday-making -- has been severely cramped. In fact, so many camping tents are now squeezed into the southern half of the country that parts of the desert look like a refugee center.

''The land is better in the north than here, and in the springtime it is cleaner,'' said Ziyad al-Shamari, who lounged on the carpet floor of his family tent drinking sweetened tea prepared by one of his servants. ''But the whole situation is not stable now and people are not allowed to go to the north, so more of them come here,'' a half-hour's drive south of the capital.

''Mistrust'' is the word he uses to describe his feelings about American intentions. ''In 1991, the Americans could have changed the regime in Iraq,'' he said, ''and so the people don't really trust that the Americans are here to just safeguard the Kuwaitis, but feel that they are looking after their own interests.''

Sipping his tea, Mr. Shamari said he was not afraid of sweeping changes in Iraq if Mr. Hussein was overthrown. ''As a Kuwaiti, our own interest is to have democracy,'' he said. But, he added: ''The vision is not clear. Kuwaitis cannot see what the Americans are planning.''
