

THREATS AND RESPONSES: GERMANY; RUMSFELD REBUKES THE U.N. AND NATO ON IRAQ APPROACH
By Thom Shanker
Feb. 9, 2003

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld issued uncompromising challenges to both the United Nations and NATO over Iraq today, warning that the global body risked ridicule and discredit and cautioning three of America's European partners that delaying plans to defend Turkey weakened the Atlantic alliance.

As Mr. Rumsfeld spoke, thousands of people joined a demonstration called by church and labor leaders in the heart of Munich to protest any war in Iraq. The senior United Nations weapons inspectors landed in Baghdad on what could be their last visit, seeking significant moves by Iraq to prove that it has really disarmed. [Page 14.]

Mr. Rumsfeld said the United Nations, by allowing Iraq to violate 17 Security Council resolutions over more than a decade, appeared to be following the League of Nations in choosing bluff over action.

Allowing Iraq to become chairman of the United Nations Commission on Disarmament and selecting Libya to lead its Commission on Human Rights showed that the institution ''seems not to be even struggling to regain credibility,'' he said.

''That these acts of irresponsibility could happen now, at this moment in history, is breathtaking,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''Those acts will be marked in the history of the U.N. as either the low point of that institution in retreat, or the turning point when the U.N. woke up, took hold of itself, and moved away from a path of ridicule to a path of responsibility.''

Turning to America's NATO partners, Mr. Rumsfeld was critical of France, Germany and Belgium for what he said were ''inexcusable'' actions to postpone alliance planning to defend Turkey in the event of war with Iraq. ''Turkey will not be hurt,'' he said. ''The United States and the countries in NATO will go right ahead and do it. What will be hurt will be NATO, not Turkey.''

Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, said today in a speech at the College of William and Mary that the United States should not try to break the Security Council's unity on Iraq and that it should take time for ''patient'' negotiations before rushing into war. [Page15]

NTV, a Turkish-language news channel, reported that Turkey's leaders had agreed to accept up to 38,000 American troops for an operation in Iraq, and that they would allow American planes to use six Turkish air bases.

Senior Turkish leaders, who were meeting with American diplomats, were not available for comment, and the report could not be confirmed. The Turkish Parliament would have to approve any such agreement and is scheduled to vote Feb. 18 on whether to allow American troops to use the country for an attack on Iraq.

In an animated rebuttal to Mr. Rumsfeld, Joschka Fischer, the German foreign minister, said his nation was not abandoning its obligations to defend Turkey, but suggested that NATO planners await the next report of the weapons inspectors on Feb. 14.

''We didn't want an extra buildup to be done, so to speak, before the decisive Security Council meeting,'' Mr. Fischer said. Proposals for NATO's defense of Turkey include deploying Patriot antimissile batteries and surveillance aircraft.

Mr. Fischer said he had no argument with the American assessment that Saddam Hussein has fired Scud missiles at his neighbors and has used chemical weapons. ''Why this priority now?'' he said. ''We have known this for a long time.''

Mr. Fischer recounted Germany's arguments for international inspectors to continue their efforts in Iraq, especially given new intelligence disclosed last week by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, and he contrasted those arguments with the American case for military action.

''I am not convinced,'' Mr. Fischer said. ''This is my problem.''

The influential Der Spiegel weekly, in advance copies released today, reported that France and Germany were considering a plan to deploy thousands of United Nations peacekeepers and hundreds more weapons inspectors to prevent military conflict in Iraq.

Livid American officials denounced the fact that they first heard of the possible plan from reporters.

''That's not the way to have a winning hand with the United States,'' said a senior American official. In fact, the official said, Mr. Rumsfeld asked the German defense minister, Peter Struck, about the report, and was told, ''We're not ready to talk yet.'' The American official indicated that the United States would not support the plan, citing the failure of United Nations forces to prevent massacres in Bosnia.

A German government spokesman confirmed that the two nations were working together to find a peaceful alternative to war, but he declined to give any details.

The lively exchange occurred during an annual conference on international security here, a gathering on defense issues, where former directors of central intelligence mingle with Russian national security czars, government ministers meet in formal bilateral sessions and in elegant private dinners. Today, legislators from across Europe snacked on smoked salmon as protesters gathered in a light snow on the nearby Marienplatz.

The gap between American and European views of the global terrorist threat was summed up by Edmund Stoiber, the premier of the German state of Bavaria, who said, ''The dangers are not perceived in this breadth and width.''

Despite Mr. Rumsfeld's lengthy public criticism of the United Nations, he spoke with his Russian counterpart, Sergei B. Ivanov, of the important role that one of its organs, the International Atomic Energy Agency, must play in defusing the nuclear crisis in North Korea.

During a closed-door bilateral meeting, they agreed that North Korea posed a threat to the entire world, and that it should be dealt with as a ''international problem,'' according to a senior Defense Department official.

Even as he rallied support for a possible war with Iraq, Mr. Rumsfeld tried humor to appease irritated allies. Mr. Rumsfeld made light of his description of Germany and France as the ''old Europe,'' whose opposition to war with Iraq he contrasts with support for the United States from Britain, Italy and a number of post-Communist nations new to NATO and the European Union. ''At my age,'' said the 70-year-old Mr. Rumsfeld, ''I consider 'old' a term of endearment.''

But Mr. Rumsfeld got in a subtle dig at Germany, the biggest and most powerful nation, which in the 1990's saw itself as a unified nation at the heart of Europe with influence increasing to the east.

''The center of Europe has indeed shifted eastward,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said, noting that the United States was pleased with the new alignments within the alliance. The post-Communist nations -- or at least many of their current leaders -- see the United States as a power whose championing of the cause of liberty proved decisive in the defeat of Communism.

Mr. Rumsfeld saluted the leaders of Britain, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Portugal and Spain, who wrote a letter pledging their commitment to disarming Iraq. He also praised a subsequent declaration -- this one from Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- offering to contribute to a coalition to enforce Security Council resolutions on disarming Iraq.

Mr. Rumsfeld said the United States did not expect every ally to join such a military effort.

But he warned those who say preparations for war must be delayed, because, he argued, ''that approach could well make war more likely, not less, because delaying preparations sends a signal of uncertainty, instead of a signal of unity and resolve.''

No one wants war, Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''War is never a first or an easy choice,'' he added. ''But the risks of war need to be balanced against the risks of doing nothing while Iraq pursues the tools of mass destruction.''

