
The Nation: Damage Control; Battle Plan: Spare Iraq's Civilians
By James Dao
Feb. 23, 2003

SINCE President Harry S. Truman authorized the use of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and even before, American wartime leaders have struggled to balance the need to win wars with the moral imperative to avoid civilian casualties -- and sometimes have paid a political price when they failed.

The price was smallest, perhaps, in World War II, when a war for the survival of civilization was seen as justifying the incineration of Dresden and Tokyo. The atomic bombs had their own moral justification -- that many more lives were saved from a bloodier conventional offensive.

But in the Vietnam War, the soaring civilian death toll spurred the antiwar movement that helped undo President Lyndon B. Johnson. In the Persian Gulf war of 1991, the American bombing of a Baghdad bunker where hundreds of Iraqis had been housed angered Arabs in neighboring countries and caused the Pentagon to suspend bombing in Baghdad for most of the rest of the war.

Now, as the Pentagon prepares for a possible invasion of Iraq, the pressures to reduce civilian deaths in a new gulf war may be greater than in any conflict in memory, experts say.

A war in Iraq would probably be watched live on television by more people than witnessed any war before. And while nobody thinks wars can be fought without some unintended deaths, the Bush administration knows that reports of Iraqi civilian casualties, beamed into millions of homes, could undermine the tenuous support, at home and abroad, for a war to oust Saddam Hussein.

Call it the Al Jazeera effect; even Iraqi refugees and Arab leaders who yearn for the end of Saddam Hussein's rule say Americans would be reviled in the Arab world if Iraq's liberation came at the price of a high civilian death toll. Such hostility to American troops could make postwar reconstruction in Iraq even more difficult.

Americans' support for war could also be affected. While advances in precision-guided weapons have made it possible to limit errant bombings, the advances have also helped to dampen tolerance for civilian casualties. A recent New York Times/CBS News poll indicated that support for using military action to depose Mr. Hussein would fall by 20 percentage points, to 46 percent, if a substantial number of Iraqis died.

''High levels of civilian casualties, or the perception of high levels of casualties, could lead to an international diplomatic outcry to end the war prematurely,'' said William Arkin, an adviser to Human Rights Watch who studied civilian casualties in the Persian Gulf war of 1991. ''That is the one thing that could stand in the way of the administration's war plan being fully implemented.''

Faced with those prospects, the Bush administration has gone to great lengths to reduce collateral damage, as the Pentagon calls civilian casualties. First, it has designed an air campaign that tries to avoid destroying bridges, roads and other public works so that the country can be rebuilt quickly, and peoples' daily lives are not completely disrupted. It has instructed its planners to select targets where homes, hospitals, schools and mosques are least likely to be damaged. It has even required planners to calculate whether bombs that drift too short or too long might hit civilian targets -- and to readjust lines of attack if they do.

''One big difference from where we are today and Vietnam is that collateral damage has become a standard part of mission planning,'' said Benjamin S. Lambeth, a senior defense analyst at the RAND Corporation. ''In Vietnam, it was taken for granted that free-fall dumb bombs would miss as often as they hit. We don't live in that world anymore.''

Second, the Pentagon has developed a war plan that aims to avoid the block-by-block urban combat that in the past has caused large numbers of civilian deaths, relying instead on pinpoint air strikes to destroy Iraqi military sites, isolate Mr. Hussein and cripple army units before they can retreat to the cities. It has also expanded training of troops in how to avoid harming civilians.

Command Sgt. Maj. Robert Gallagher, a veteran of the 1993 ''Black Hawk Down'' battle in Mogadishu, where 18 Americans and hundreds of Somalis died in urban combat, cited the case of a soldier who spots a tank behind a house. The soldier is taught to consider using a lighter weapon to disable the tank, not a heavier one that could destroy it -- and the house. ''We train soldiers to think on their feet and to use the minimum amount of force necessary to accomplish the mission,'' said Sergeant Gallagher, who is now in Kuwait with the Third Infantry Division.

Third, the Bush administration has launched a pre-emptive public relations campaign warning that Mr. Hussein might try to put his own people at risk in order to increase the civilian body count.

Last month, the White House Office of Global Communications issued a report saying that Mr. Hussein purposely put civilians into military bunkers like the one bombed in 1991, and might try to do so again. Two weeks ago, President Bush said Mr. Hussein was likely to use chemical or biological weapons against his people, and blame the United States for their deaths. Last week, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said the Iraqi military would probably try to use ''human shields'' to protect its sites.

But Tom Malinowski, the Washington advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, said that even if Mr. Hussein uses human shields, it does not absolve American troops of the responsibility under the Geneva Convention to avoid killing them. ''You can't just say, 'It's Saddam's fault,' '' he said.

Despite all the Pentagon's precautions, no one believes civilian casualties can be avoided. Even with the precision-guided munitions used in the Afghan war, some human rights groups estimate that more than 1,000 civilians died -- twice as many as in the Kosovo war, and about one-third as many as in the 1991 gulf war.

At the same time, some military experts also raise concerns that saddling soldiers with too many choices in the fog of war, and making planners too cautious, could make American forces gun-shy and place them at risk. For example, ground troops might be endangered if American warplanes were prevented from striking targets where Iraqi troops were hiding near mosques or homes.

John A. Warden III, a retired Air Force colonel who was a leading architect of the air campaign in the gulf war, makes a related point: In the Afghan war, he contends, pilots and planners were so concerned about avoiding civilian deaths that they may have withheld fire on several occasions when they could have killed Mullah Omar, the Taliban leader.

Mr. Warden argues that while preventing the deaths of civilians should be a priority, it must not outweigh another objective: ending the war quickly. If saving some lives means prolonging a war, the net result might be greater suffering. ''It's a tough choice,'' he said. ''But going to war is a tough choice.''

Yet if reducing civilian casualties is needed to maintain public support for war, prolonging a conflict may be a political necessity to reach the ultimate objective, said Anthony H. Cordesman, a military analyst at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.

''Today, the political dimension of war is critical,'' he said. ''The United States wants to be able to emerge from this war saying: 'All those weapons of mass destruction you said aren't there? Here they are. And all those civilian casualties you warned about? Well, they didn't happen.' ''
