

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Once a Site of Death, Now a Whirl of Fun
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 3, 2003

For a few moments, as the Ferris wheel turned and children dashed past, it was almost possible to forget what this amusement park used to be.

''When I come here and see all these games and rides, I feel happy and get excited,'' said Fazil Muhammad Hussein, a 12-year-old boy, offering a perfectly normal statement, except he said it while standing not far from a former mass grave.

This is Azady Park, a place that captures many of the dizzying contrasts of life in northern Iraq.

For three decades, this plot of land near the city's center was a dispensary of fear, surrounded by high concrete walls, brimming with guards. It was a headquarters for Iraqi military and intelligence services, known as a place of incarcerations, torture sessions and death.

It was from here, in 1963, that Kurds received one of their first tastes of the Arab Baath Socialist Party's designs for the Kurdish region, when units from the compound stormed into this city, rousting suspected dissidents from their sleep and bringing them to interrogation centers inside. Many turned up later in shallow common graves.

The walls are gone now. In what amounts to an astonishing act of replacement, a place of horrors has become the city's version of Disneyland, as well as a social club, a roller-skating rink, an open-air theater and a swimming pool.

It is a 500-acre testament to Kurdish resilience, as well as a case of imaginative redevelopment in a region that has tried to separate itself from the image of Saddam Hussein. Kurds speak of this park as a symbol of possibility for all of Iraq, a sign of just how drastic change can be in territory wrested from Baath rule.

'' 'Azady' means freedom, and this name means that our generation is now free,'' said Hakim Qader H. Aziz, president of the municipal council.

There is no shortage of nightmarish locales in northern Iraq, a region that has been outside Mr. Hussein's control since an uprising in 1991.

There is Barzan, where in 1983 Mr. Hussein's forces seized 8,000 men, none of whom have ever been heard from again. There is Halabja, where in 1988 the Iraqi Air Force dropped chemical weapons, killing an estimated 5,000 civilians and wounding as many as 20,000 more, the worst of the 281 uses of Iraqi gas on Kurds that have been locally documented.

There are huge swaths of silent landscape, minefields laid in the Iran-Iraq war.

Much work has been done to renew this land since Kurds began their qausi-independence. Mines have been cleared, villages rebuilt, human remains exhumed and then properly interred. Monuments abound.

But there is nothing quite like Azady Park, a place so boldly reconceived that it defies the senses. For the admission cost of 1 dinar, at today's exchange rate the equivalent of about 13 cents, visitors frolic where the Iraqi government killed.

''It is one of the greatest things we have done, to change this place of crime into a place of amusement, a playground for all of the people to use,'' said Sirwan Salih Saeed, deputy director of the park. ''The children of this city all come here.''

Work began here in 1997, and because Kurdish budgets are small it remains a work in progress, with some sections still only bare soil, and more plans awaiting financing.

There are 14 amusement rides now; 6 more are being designed. Some of the old Iraqi Army buildings have not been torn down, and the small area of the park where they remain has become a home for squatters and refugees. The local government hopes to relocate them.

It is also still a place of considerable dread. Now and then, as when digging an artificial lake or planting some of the 12,000 new trees, laborers stumble upon more bones. The remains of 28 people were discovered in the late 1990's under a spot where bushes have been arranged into an outdoor maze.

Still, people come, even in the winter, when attendance varies from a few hundred to several thousand visitors each day. In the summer, sometimes 10,000 people a day pass through the gates, Mr. Saeed said.

As attendance has climbed, the park has taken on qualities of its own. For example, Kurdish society is deeply conservative, and dating is restricted. Azady Park has become a place where young couples elude their neighbors' gaze, riding high on the Ferris wheel, clasping hands or stealing away to the bushes, where they can be seen touching fingertips while sitting on a bench.

On a recent day, Namo Ghafur walked with Lezan Hamid, a young woman whose hair was covered by a scarf. She looked at the ground while he called her ''my beloved.''

''If you are having an attraction for someone, it is good to bring them here, because it is a free place and away from everybody's eyes,'' Mr. Ghafur said. ''This is a place that is good for love.''

The park also has a members-only social club, with a restaurant and dance floor, where influential families gather for holidays and parties. On New Year's Eve, the club was packed, and the dance floor shook as scores of people moved through the room in a traditional Kurdish dance.

Smoking a thick cigar and greeting visitors with homemade salads and 12-year-old Scotch, one member, Barzan Faraj, marveled at the revelry. ''It is incredible that we have this, when you remember what this place used to be,'' he said.

It is a memory that will not die.

After the first night of terror, in 1963, the Baath Party did not last long. It was ousted in a countercoup months later. But the party reclaimed power in 1968, and is still in Baghdad, the political embodiment of Mr. Hussein. This garrison was used again to carry out attacks on Kurds, or as a place to jail and interrogate them, from 1968 to 1991.

Nawroz Saeed, a local engineer, remembers the first night. He can name the exhumed and recall details of their lives: this one was a physics teacher, that one a captain of a local soccer team. He remembers one stylish dresser whose decomposing remains were identified by a particularly handsome buckle on a belt that held him together.

''It is in my mind, like a cinema, always repeating,'' he said.

He paused, then continued, ''I was in my uncle's house on the morning they came for him.''

His uncle was Namiq Agha. Iraqi soldiers beat him in his night clothes and led him away. Namiq Agha's wife, Najia Abdulrakhman, recalls his last words. She was pregnant at the time, and had a daughter and a son. ''He said, 'Take care of the children -- look after them,' '' she said.

The next winter, runoff from a rainstorm exposed a shallow mass grave just outside the garrison's fence, not far from where the Ferris wheel now stands. Namiq Agha was among the dead.

His second son, Yadgar Namiq Agha, was born two days later. He is 39 now, and has two sons of his own. Last summer, almost four decades after the disappearance of her husband, Najia Abdulrakhman took the grandsons to Azady Park.

She sat and watched the two little boys, Namiq Agha's descendants, going from ride to ride, as her mind went back and forth, between this new Sulaimaniya and the old.

''It is a very nice and interesting place for people, and you know how children are, always wanting to play,'' she said. ''But I always remember that black day.''
