

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraqis Join a Rally to Show That War Will Be Resisted
By John F. Burns
March 16, 2003

Waving Kalashnikov rifles in the air and burning American and Israeli flags, thousands of Iraqis took to the streets of Baghdad and other cities today in a tightly marshaled show of defiance for the United States.

The main demonstration in Baghdad appeared to have been organized with a view to cautioning President Bush about the resistance American troops may confront in Iraq.

Along with soldiers and militiamen, factory and office workers, women's groups and schoolchildren, the battalions parading past a reviewing stand on one of the capital's main shopping streets were a colorful panorama of Iraq's ethnic and sectarian groups.

Iraqi officials offered what appeared to be hugely ambitious estimates of the number of demonstrators, with some saying that as many as a million people had turned out in a city with a population of 4.5 million. By the rough estimates of Western reporters, the total appeared to have been in the range of 100,000 to 200,000. According to some at the rally, many of those taking part, perhaps most, had been ordered to attend by their work supervisors or by neighborhood committees.

But even if the turnout was hardly spontaneous, and the mood curiously desultory, even limp, the demonstration showed that Saddam Hussein, after 23 years in power, still has an impressive organizational ability and the power to compel compliance. What remains uncertain, even in the face of the vows Iraqis offer on such occasions to fight American troops, is whether many will have the weapons, the perseverance or the will to do so.

In a society that has lived for 35 years under the rigid, neo-Stalinist compulsions of the ruling Baath Party, organizer of the rally today, any attempt to say what Iraqis really believe, or what they may do in conditions of extreme crisis for the government, is in the end largely a matter of conjecture.

Some Iraqis have begun to speak to Westerners with an unprecedented candor. But most people here, disciplined by years of fear and unquestioning fealty, still trust nobody when it comes to political matters outside their immediate family and closest friends, and sometimes do not even trust them.

But something of the crosscurrents that are flowing was suggested by a dinner that one Westerner attended in a Baghdad home on Friday night. The hosts, a retired army officer and his wife, a teacher, fell to arguing about what to do if Mr. Bush returned from his Sunday meeting in the Azores with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain with a decision to order American troops into combat. Iraqi officials who discussed that meeting privately today said they believed that it would be one of the last, crucial watersheds on the road to war.

The retired officer said he would find a weapon and fight, not out of personal loyalty to Mr. Hussein, of whom he was severely critical, but because his yearning for an Iraq free of political repression was outweighed by his sense of patriotic indignation at the prospect of an American general supplanting Mr. Hussein. The officer's wife, alarmed, said she would lock all the doors of the house, as well as the windows, and prevent her husband from leaving, because joining armed resistance to the American forces would be to invite death in a hopeless cause.

What does seem clear, to just about all Westerners who have visited Iraq in recent months, is that Mr. Hussein and his aging oligarchy have long since exhausted the popular support that greeted the Baath revolution of 1968.

Iraqis whisper with increasing desperation over what has become of Iraq's oil prosperity of the 1970's after punishing wars with Iran in the 1980's and with the United States and its coalition partners over Kuwait in 1991, along with more than a decade of United Nations economic sanctions that have speeded the country's decline toward having a social and economic profile akin to that of much of sub-Saharan Africa. On top of this, there have been the ruthless workings of a secret police with few counterparts in the modern world.

But the same Iraqis who condemn the years of misrule have deep misgivings about the prospect of an American imperium. In that respect, at least, the demonstrations today in Baghdad, however bereft of real passion they may have seemed to outsiders in the waving of portraits of Mr. Hussein and the chanting of his name, may have conveyed something of the reality awaiting American forces if they end up controlling Iraq.

Reporters watching the flow of humanity were approached repeatedly by people who said little or nothing about Mr. Hussein, but a torrent of things about America's greed for Iraq's oil, about its desire to weaken Iraq as a source of opposition to Israel and what is taken here to be its suppression of the Palestinians, and about the arrogance of American power under Mr. Bush. The remarks came from men in Western suits and women in black Islamic cloaks; from soldiers, doctors, professors, teachers, teenagers in school uniforms, Muslim clerics and shopkeepers, from right across the spectrum of Iraqi society.

One woman, who identified herself as Aliya, a 50-year-old high school English teacher, pushed her way through the crowd to a group of reporters, lifted the hood of her black cloak back from her forehead, and ran off a lengthy checklist of grievances against America, from oil to Israel. Listening in, not far away, was a man who appeared to be an Iraqi secret police agent. But the woman, seemingly indifferent, offered a revealing answer when she was asked if she thought Iraqis fighting American soldiers would be doing so for Mr. Hussein, or for Iraq's freedom from foreign control.

''For Iraq,'' she said.

In other respects, the rally cannot have been a resounding morale booster for the ruling party. Western diplomats here have estimated that the core of Mr. Hussein's ruling elite -- die-hards, mostly men, who have a deep personal commitment to the Iraqi leader, or who are so closely identified with his rule that they may feel they have little option but to lead the fight for his survival -- could number anywhere from 5,000 to 15,000, in a nation of 24 million. Western military experts have estimated that Iraq's army may have as few as 130,000 soldiers, about a third as many as in 1991.

On the podium for the rally on the 14th of Ramadan Street, in the mundane heart of a stretch of fast-food restaurants and electronic appliance stores, were a group of men who would probably be counted among those die-hards: senior army officers and Baath Party officials, all in green serge uniforms, the army men distinguished by heavy-caliber pistols loosely holstered at their waists, one of them, in a heavy mustache, black beret and Ray-Ban glasses, almost a ringer for Mr. Hussein.

They also had a distracted, almost disengaged air, as though they, like the marchers, were mostly going through the motions.

The marchers, for their part, seemed to approach their task with more of a carnival spirit than anything approaching real fervor. They waved back in a flaccid way, many of them smoking and chatting as they went. Even their banners, in English, seemed polite, rather than militant.

Many of the marching groups came with Kalashnikovs, and waved them, smiling, at Westerners. But on closer inspection, almost none of the marchers' weapons appeared to have bullets in their magazines.
