

THREATS AND RESPONSES: STRATEGY; Rumsfeld Says Other Nations Promise to Aid Attack on Iraq
By Thom Shanker and David E. Sanger
Sept. 19, 2002


Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said today that a number of countries had privately pledged direct military support for any offensive against Iraq. His assertion that opposition to Saddam Hussein's rule had gained broader international support came just hours after Congressional leaders said a vote would be held before the November election on whether to authorize President Bush to take whatever military action he deems necessary.

In his testimony in Congress today, Mr. Rumsfeld argued vociferously that weapons inspections in Iraq would be unlikely to lead to the elimination of its weapons of mass destruction. At the White House, President Bush dismissed Mr. Hussein's offer to allow international inspectors back into Iraq as a ''ploy'' that is ''not going to fool anybody.''

The White House said it would send to Congress as early as Thursday the wording of a proposed resolution authorizing action. But Mr. Bush and his aides were clearly worried today that Mr. Hussein's new offer could delay -- and perhaps blow off course -- their effort to force both the rapid disarmament of Iraq and the fall of its government.

Speaking on a day that Congress disclosed strong evidence that the intelligence agencies missed signals of an impending terrorist attack last year, Mr. Rumsfeld used his appearance in Congress today to turn the argument around. He maintained that this time the administration was ''connecting the dots'' on Iraq before that country had a chance to use weapons of mass destruction or put them in the hands of terrorists.

''The dots are there for all to connect,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''If they aren't good enough, rest assured they will only be good enough after another disaster.'' By then, he said, ''it will be too late.''

With midterm elections less than two months away, that argument seemed to be swaying Democrats. Emerging from a breakfast meeting with Mr. Bush, the four top leaders of Congress appeared in agreement that a resolution would begin making its way through committees by the middle of next week, and the scrutiny turned to wording of the resolution.

Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the minority leader, said he believed that the resolution would focus on authority to eliminate biological, chemical and nuclear weapons rather than the ouster of Mr. Hussein.

''I think we're focused on the most immediate threat, which is growing worse every day,'' Mr. Lott said. One Republican strategist said the language would be carefully calibrated to avoid hurting the administration's cause before the United Nations.

In fact, Mr. Rumsfeld argued that Congress should pass a resolution of support before the United Nations Security Council acts.

''Delaying a vote in Congress would send the wrong message, in my view, just as we are asking the international community to take a stand and as we are cautioning the Iraqi regime to respond and consider its options,'' he said.

Throughout the day, in public and behind the scenes, the administration mounted a fierce campaign to portray Iraq's sudden invitation to inspectors -- who have been banned by Iraq for three and a half years -- as a predictable and dangerous delaying tactic, devised by Mr. Hussein in an effort to split the United Nations Security Council.

Mr. Bush, speaking in detail for the first time about the Iraqi offer, said of Mr. Hussein: ''He deceives, he delays, he denies. And the United States and, I'm convinced, the world community, aren't going to fall for that kind of rhetoric by him again.''

The White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, read a statement by the former chief United Nations arms inspector, Richard Butler, who called the Iraqi offer ''a very snaky letter.'' Again quoting Mr. Butler, Mr. Fleischer suggested that without completely unfettered access to Iraqi installations, a new inspection team would not have '' 'a snowball's chance in hell' of establishing whether Iraq had nuclear, chemical or germ weapons.''

Mr. Bush plans to call President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia soon, administration officials said, in hopes of reversing Russia's public position that no new United Nations resolution -- with strict deadlines and penalties for noncompliance -- is needed before inspectors return to Iraq. The officials said Mr. Bush might be able to reverse that view with assurances to Mr. Putin that if Mr. Hussein is deposed, any new Iraqi government would pay the $8 billion or so that Iraq now owes to Moscow.

Meanwhile, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was discussing wording for a proposed Security Council resolution with British officials. Britain is expected to sponsor the planned resolution, and the White House is clearly hoping to win passage in the next 10 days or so, before an inspection schedule is set.

Publicly, Mr. Bush's aides expressed confidence that after another round of diplomacy at the United Nations, they would obtain a resolution setting short deadlines and specific penalties for defiance.

But in private, they fumed about Secretary General Kofi Annan. Mr. Annan, they contended, had never consulted with Security Council members before accepting the letter from Iraq allowing inspectors back in, and they said he had undercut the effort to force a different kind of inspection by appearing to take the Iraqi offer at face value.

The most dramatic statement from Mr. Rumsfeld, during more than three hours of testimony before the House Armed Services Committee, was his disclosure that if Mr. Bush decided to attack Iraq, others would join.

''There will be other countries assisting the United States of America in the event that the United States of America decides that that is the only course available,'' he said.

''A number of countries,'' he said without disclosing which ones, have told the Bush administration that ''they will cooperate in a variety of different ways'' -- even without United Nations approval of military action. He said the aid would include troops, bases, overflight rights and economic contributions.

Earlier this week, a senior economic adviser to Mr. Bush estimated that war with Iraq could cost $100 billion to $200 billion, though the White House has since distanced itself from that estimate.

Mr. Rumsfeld said that, in anticipation of a feared American offensive, Iraq had deployed troops and weapons near schools, hospitals and mosques either to deter an attack or to take advantage of civilian deaths in a propaganda war.

Protesters briefly interrupted Mr. Rumsfeld's testimony when they chanted, ''Inspections, not war!'' The Capitol police escorted three women, two carrying signs, from the hearing.

Mr. Rumsfeld also said that a war with Iraq would require the mobilization of additional members of the National Guard and Reserve, but he said there was no consideration of reinstating the draft. The Pentagon said 72,269 members of the Guard and Reserve were on duty today.

Pressed on the economic burden of any war with Iraq, Mr. Rumsfeld said ''other countries undoubtedly would contribute'' financial assistance. But he also stressed that the harm terrorists could wreak on the American economy would make a potential offensive against Mr. Hussein inexpensive by comparison.

''The cost compared to 9/11 is so insignificant, compared to the loss of lives, compared to the billions of dollars that were lost in material things and in market values and in disruptions in people's lives, in not being able to fly or go places or do things, in the concerns of families -- and it would be modest, to be sure,'' he said.

In Iraq, Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz said Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks showed that Washington was looking for a pretext for ''a criminal attack'' on Iraq.
