

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE CONGRESSIONAL RESOLUTION; LAWMAKERS BEGIN PUSH TO GIVE BUSH AUTHORITY ON IRAQ
By Alison Mitchell
Oct. 4, 2002


Congress began its push today toward granting President Bush the authority to use force against Iraq. An outnumbered but determined group of Democrats and some Republicans tried to buck the bipartisan sentiment to give Mr. Bush broad discretion to initiate military operations against Saddam Hussein.

A day after President Bush and House leaders of both parties reached agreement on an Iraq resolution, a subdued Senate agreed late today to open debate on Iraq, which is expected to begin in earnest on Friday.

''It is up to us today to send a message to the world and to America's friends,'' said the minority leader, Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, ''that we are committed to stand with them to eliminate the threat that this rogue regime poses to the peace of the world.''

Across Capitol Hill, the House International Relations Committee beat back a dozen attempts by a handful of Democrats to change the resolution supported by the White House. The committee voted 31 to 11 to send Mr. Bush's preferred version to the House. Democrats on the committee split 10 to 9 in favor of the resolution. Two Republicans, James A. Leach of Iowa and Ron Paul of Texas, opposed it.

''The train is now on its way,'' said Representative Tom Lantos of California, the ranking Democrat on the committee who backed the resolution.

The major dividing line in Congress is not whether to give Mr. Bush the authority to go to war against Iraq, but how much authority to give him. Both the House and Senate are expected to take final votes on the resolutions some time next week.

The United Nations remains under pressure from the United States and Britain to pass a tough new resolution on Iraq. Leaders of the U.N. arms inspection teams Iraq has agreed to allow back in said today that they would not go until the Security Council gave them new instructions to guide their work. [Page A15.]

On Capitol Hill, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the majority leader, who was conspicuously absent from a Rose Garden ceremony on Wednesday that was intended to show the breadth of bipartisan support for the compromise resolution, said he still thought, ''there is a chance we can make additional improvements.''

''I want to try to do that,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''I think it's too early to give up the effort.'' He said he wanted it made clearer that the United States would consider using force unilaterally only if it exhausted any hope of working through the United Nations.

Mr. Daschle said he planned for the Senate to consider the White House resolution and two alternatives. At the very least, the move would allow dissenters, mostly Democrats, to vote to take a stand against Iraq yet give Mr. Bush a more circumscribed ability to use force. Mr. Daschle said he would support one of the alternatives but would not ask other Democrats to do so.

Though a number of Democrats and some Republicans expressed misgivings today about where the nation was heading, the die had been cast the day before, lawmakers said. Once Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House minority leader, joined with House and Senate Republicans and a handful of moderate Senate Democrats at the Rose Garden ceremony in supporting a broad grant of war powers for the president, dissenters were pushed to the margins.

''All of us on this see through the glass darkly,'' said Mr. Gephardt, Democrat of Missouri, who acknowledged some doubts even though he supports the White House. ''I wish I knew enough to know the absolute right thing to do. I think I am doing the right thing. I have given this a lot of thought and effort, and I am trying to do the right thing for the people I represent and the people of this country. But I don't know.''

The start of formal Senate debate was delayed by Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, who tried to block the Senate from turning to the issue. Waving a copy of the Constitution, pointing his finger in anger and quoting Abraham Lincoln and James Madison, Mr. Byrd railed against what he termed Mr. Bush's ''call to arms.''

''Blind and improvident!'' Mr. Byrd, 84, shouted, quoting the Roman historian Livy. ''Congress would be wise to heed those words today, for as sure as the sun is rising in the east, we are embarking on a course of action with regard to Iraq that in its haste is both blind and improvident.''

Thundering in a nearly empty chamber, he lashed everyone in Washington. ''The newly bellicose mood that permeates this White House is unfortunate all the more so because it is clearly motivated by campaign politics,'' he chided. ''Before risking the lives of American troops, all members of Congress, Democrats and Republican alike, must overcome the siren song of political polls and focus strictly on the merits, not politics, of this most serious issue.''

But few heeded him and the Senate voted 95 to 1 to move forward on the matter, with Mr. Byrd the sole dissenter.

The House resolution, which was hammered out in bipartisan negotiations with the White House, mentions support for efforts to gain the backing of the United Nations Security Council for force, but reserves for Mr. Bush the right to act on his own. The two alternatives the Senate will also consider do not go as far and their chances of passage are considered unlikely.

One sponsored by Senator Carl Levin, the Michigan Democrat who is the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, demands unconditional access for U.N. weapons inspectors in Iraq and authorizes the use of force by U.N. member states to enforce this.

It also notes that the United States has the right to use military force in self-defense. Moreover, it asserts that Congress will not officially adjourn so that it could return at any time and authorize unilateral action by the president, if needed.

''It makes a difference if we go it alone,'' Mr. Levin said, asking whether Mr. Hussein and his commanders would ''be more likely to use weapons of mass destruction against U.S. military forces or other nations'' if the world community was standing against him.

But Mr. Levin was simply seeking a stand-alone vote and not to substitute his resolution for the one backed by Mr. Bush. ''I just believe there's a lot of feeling, a lot of support for the approach which I've outlined, regardless of how many votes it gets in the end,'' he said.

Another proposal to be presented as an amendment to the compromise resolution is more specific about the circumstances permitting Mr. Bush to use force. The measure -- sponsored by Senators Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, and Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana -- authorizes such action to enforce U.N. resolutions against weapons of mass destruction and a threat from such weapons. The White House's version gives Mr. Bush more latitude.

Even before the Senate officially turned toward the Iraq resolution, senators today wandered sporadically into the chamber to speak about it.

''We have never pulled the massive trigger of our weapons on a nation that has not attacked us first,'' said Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, slamming her fist on a lectern.

Others supported the president. ''I hope we look at the downside of doing nothing,'' said Senator Sam Brownback, Republican of Kansas, ''and the upside of helping people pursue freedom and liberty.''
