

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DISARMING SADDAM HUSSEIN; TEAMS OF EXPERTS TO HUNT IRAQ ARMS
By Judith Miller
March 19, 2003

The Bush administration has deployed mobile labs and new specialized teams of intelligence officials and disarmament experts to Kuwait to help the military search for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq as soon as war begins, according to senior administration officials.

Defense officials are also reaching out to former international weapons inspectors, as part of an ambitious top-secret effort to rapidly find, secure and ultimately destroy the caches of chemical, biological and other unconventional weapons the administration asserts President Saddam Hussein is hiding.

In recent interviews, officials described the plans as one of the most delicate and crucial missions of the war against Iraq. Never before, they said, had the United States proposed to disarm a nation of unconventional weapons by force.

The Pentagon has deployed several new tactical units called mobile exploitation teams, or MET's, with state-of-the-art equipment and novel tactics to locate and survey at least 130 and as many as 1,400 possible weapons sites.

In addition, officials said the military was planning to find and interview hundreds of Iraqi scientists who worked on germ, chemical or nuclear-related projects, and to seek their cooperation in disarming Iraq of the weapons that the United Nations required Mr. Hussein to destroy after the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The administration has assigned top priority to the hunt for weapons of mass destruction, officials said. After months of relatively fruitless international inspections, the discovery of such arms, officials said, would vindicate the administration's decision to go to war to disarm Iraq. Conversely, failure to find them would leave the administration vulnerable to charges that it had started a war needlessly.

Administration officials are determined to find illegal weapons before Mr. Hussein can send them out of the country and perhaps sell them to other rogue nations or terrorist groups.

The American plans to eliminate illegal Iraqi arms were drawn up independently of United Nations weapons inspections and reflect the Bush administration's belief that those inspections would never succeed in disarming Iraq in the face of Mr. Hussein's resistance. The inspectors withdrew from Iraq today after Secretary General Kofi Annan ordered their evacuation.

Maj. Gen. James A. Marks, a senior Army intelligence officer in the Iraq operation who helped draft overall plans for the hunt for unconventional weapons, said the mission was challenging because Mr. Hussein has had more than a decade to find ways of hiding them.

''He's the master of where's the pea,'' General Marks said.

Senior national security aides approved the concept of the mission at a White House meeting almost two months ago and put the Pentagon in charge of it. Two mobile labs that can analyze chemical and biological samples in less than 24 hours with 90 percent confidence were recently sent to Kuwait.

The Defense Department has assembled teams of highly trained disarmament and technical experts from several different Pentagon offices -- organized in the mobile exploitation teams -- who will accompany troops with a special mandate to hunt for unconventional weapons.

On the teams are small units of intelligence analysts and technical and security experts, whose goal is to locate sites, take samples and interview Iraqi scientists who have had central roles in Iraq's weapons programs.

In the last two weeks, the Pentagon has made contact with several former international inspectors who worked for the now-extinct United Nations Special Commission, or Unscom, which conducted inspections in Iraq from 1991 through December 1998. Administration officials are asking them to join the specialized Pentagon teams and help the military spot hidden storage and production sites, collect documents about the programs and identify and interview crucial Iraqi scientists as well as military and security officials who might know where such weapons have been made or may be stored.

The Pentagon's Defense Threat Reduction Agency, which is charged with carrying out the military's plans for its weapons hunt, has printed some 9,000 booklets to help front-line troops identify suspect facilities and dangerous chemicals, germs and other materials.

The booklets, small enough to be tucked away in a soldier's pocket and printed on sturdy waterproof paper, also instruct soldiers about how to handle such dangerous material, and outline proper procedures for isolating and securing such sites.

Administration officials said there were still no precise estimates of the mission's scope or how much it would ultimately cost.

''We are doing the most careful planning we can in light of the large number of unknowns,'' said Douglas J. Feith, under secretary of defense for policy. ''People who are demanding precision now are being unrealistic.''

Defense Department officials describe the effort as unique. The plans draw upon lessons learned from the war against terrorism in Afghanistan, where for example, a mobile lab was first deployed at some 60 sites. But the officials say they have never before undertaken such an ambitious ''search and destroy'' mission for unconventional weapons.

''We're going to hit some dry holes; they know we're coming,'' said Lisa Bronson, assistant secretary of defense for international security policy, whose office is overseeing the project.

The plans, officials stressed, are still evolving. Defense officials said they were told only in December to draw up plans to ''rapidly disable'' unconventional weapons production and storage sites. And the Defense Threat Reduction Agency was officially charged with responsibility for carrying out the mission only about two weeks ago.

The White House and defense planners decided less than three weeks ago that it could be useful to include former international arms inspectors on the military teams. A formal decision to do so has still not been made. But five inspectors, all of whom asked not to be identified, said they were asked about joining the mission within the last 10 days. A few of them said they were still trying to get their employers' permission to join the mission.

Though the White House officially blessed the outlines of the mission about eight weeks ago, planning for the hunt began at the Pentagon last July, officials said. In August, the Pentagon-operated National Defense University in Washington held a secret meeting to consider how best to go about disarming Iraq. In September, former inspectors of the old Unscom met with officials from several Pentagon offices, including the Central Command in Tampa, Fla., to discuss the lessons learned from the inspectors' eight-year effort to disarm Iraq of unconventional weapons.

Senior officials said the disarmament teams included veterans of the Cooperative Threat Reduction programs that worked to disarm former Soviet germ, chemical and nuclear weapons facilities. Other experts have investigated Iraqi weapons programs as intelligence analysts for a decade. Others are seasoned chemists, biologists and other experts experienced in sampling and modern lab techniques. Still others are linguists and students of Iraqi and Arab culture.

''You can't send amateurs to do this job,'' an official said.

Tension persists, however, between the Central Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon over how intelligence and technical experts should be used. The Pentagon has been given the lead in hunting for Iraqi weapons, but C.I.A. experts will not be included in the mobile exploitation teams, officials said, and will have a separate effort.

White House and Pentagon policy planners say disarming Iraq will involve four basic stages, the first two while the fighting is still under way. At first, sites, documents and scientists will be quickly assessed for information that can protect troops and civilians. The second stage will focus on securing and disabling weapons sites.
