

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS; U.N. MONITOR SAYS IRAQIS ARE DENYING HAVING ARMS CACHE
By Julia Preston
Nov. 26, 2002


Iraqi officials have told United Nations inspectors in Baghdad that they have no weapons of mass destruction and expressed reservations about inspections of President Saddam Hussein's palaces, Hans Blix, one of the inspections chiefs, said here today.

Briefing the Security Council, Mr. Blix said Iraqi officials had pledged to cooperate fully with the inspections, but had also raised a host of skeptical questions about a declaration of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons due on Dec. 8.

Suggesting that the declaration was too broad to finish by that deadline, the Iraqis wondered if they had to include every detail of their civilian chemical industries, down to ''the production of plastic slippers,'' Mr. Blix said.

He said he had responded with a curt warning that if Iraq was going to claim to be clean, it would have to provide convincing evidence.

The weapons chief gave a glimpse of his tough stance and Iraq's ambivalent reaction in his first report to the Council since he and Mohamed ElBaradei, the top nuclear inspector, traveled to Baghdad a week ago, beginning a new round of inspections after a four-year hiatus. The first contingent of 19 United Nations experts arrived in Baghdad today, saying they planned to conduct the first inspections on Wednesday.

On a day when many Council nations expected a show of unity to support the inspections, some diplomats were surprised that the United States wanted to add several items that it said could be used for military purposes to a list of restricted imports to Iraq.

When debate produced no accord on whether or how to revise the list, the Council voted tonight to extend the mandate for United Nations monitoring of Iraqi oil sales until Dec. 4. It was set to expire at midnight tonight.

The program, called oil for food, uses Iraqi oil revenues to buy food, medicine and other civilian goods for the population.

At the behest of the Pentagon, American officials said, the United States ambassador here, John D. Negroponte, insisted on adding several medical and communications items to the list of goods that must pass United Nations review. They included global positioning scanning devices, equipment to jam radio intercepts and special 7-inch injectors to administer the drug atropine, as well as the drug itself. It is used to resuscitate heart attack patients, but can also be a treatment for victims of attacks with chemical nerve agents.

The United States was also seeking to block large-scale imports of Cipro, a strong antibiotic that can be used to treat anthrax infection, administration officials said.

Mr. Negroponte said the United States believed that those goods ''did not have a benign, civilian or purely humanitarian purpose.'' He said Washington insisted on extending the debate for nine days in order to set a timetable for revising the list of goods before it would approve renewing the oil-for-food program.

Other Council diplomats were frustrated that the United States insisted on the revisions to the list as the deadline approached. The list has been the subject of long and contentious debate in the past, and most Council nations were hoping to avoid getting into it again until sometime next year, to avoid undermining the weapons inspections.

''We would like to have a solution to this, and everybody must try to come together,'' Ambassador Peter Ole Kolby of Norway said in support of the program, with a diplomatic hint of frustration.

Mr. Blix said he had told Iraq to expect aggressive surprise inspections.

''The Council has authorized us to go anywhere anytime, and we intend to do so without telling anyone in advance,'' Mr. Blix said he had informed Iraq, in comments that were praised by American officials.

While saying they would do nothing to delay the inspections, the Iraqi officials, led by Gen. Amir Hammudi al-Saadi, also observed that entering ''into a presidential site or a ministry was not exactly the same thing as entry into a factory.''

Resolution 1441, adopted unanimously by the Council on Nov. 8 to give the inspectors a new, forceful mandate, authorizes them to inspect the vast compounds around Mr. Hussein's nine palaces.

Most Council nations were pleased by Mr. Blix's report, which was endorsed by Mr. ElBaradei, that the inspections were moving forward as planned in the resolution.

''So far so good,'' said the Chinese ambassador, Wang Yingfan, speaking for the 15-nation Council.

But differences among the Council powers surfaced in the discussion after Mr. Blix's briefing, diplomats said. The Russian ambassador, Sergey Lavrov, took issue with Mr. Blix's statement that ''many governments'' believed that there were still programs to build weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

''I can only think of a few,'' Mr. Lavrov said, according to diplomats in the session, making it clear that Russia was not one of them.

Mr. Blix noted that the inspections teams would begin their work 19 days after Resolution 1441 was passed, considerably faster than the 45 days the Security Council allowed. He said he and Mr. ElBaradei expected to provide a comprehensive report to the Council on their progress on Jan. 27.

He said the inspection chiefs had stressed that Iraq's Dec. 8 declaration had to be complete, disclosing any prohibited program. He said past declarations by Iraq ''left it an open question whether some weapons remained.''

Mr. Blix said today that the Iraqis acknowledged that there were some discrepancies and gaps about long-range missiles in documents they had already provided to the inspectors. Iraqi officials volunteered to correct the information soon.

Secretary General Kofi Annan received only today an 11-page letter Iraq sent to him on Saturday picking apart the Council resolution clause by clause, calling it a violation of international law and an excuse for the United States to go to war.

Speaking in Paris, Mr. Annan said Iraq should cooperate with the inspections. ''That is the only way to avoid conflict in the region,'' he said.

Melissa Fleming, spokeswoman for the nuclear inspectors, said in Baghdad that they would carry out the inspections with ''suspicious minds,'' on the lookout for Iraqi deception.

Mr. ElBaradei, in Cairo, reminded Baghdad that if the inspectors gave a positive report, their work could be ''an alternative to war, not a precursor to war.'' --------------------

Support From Britain

LONDON, Nov. 25 (AP) -- Britain's Parliament declared its support today for the United Nations Security Council resolution on Iraq, despite rumblings of dissent over the manner in which military action would be decided.

The decision came after Prime Minister Tony Blair warned that President Hussein would face ''serious consequences'' if he denied that Iraq possessed banned weapons.

''We have no doubt he does have weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Blair said at a news conference. ''So let's wait and see what he actually says.''

After five hours of debate in the House of Commons, a motion by Mr. Blair's government in favor of United Nations Resolution 1441 was approved without a vote when the legislators called out their approval with a shout of ''Aye.''

Shortly before, an amendment requiring parliamentary approval for any use of British troops -- and urging a new Security Council mandate for military action to enforce Resolution 1441 -- was defeated by a vote of 452 to 85.

The supporters of the amendment, proposed by the opposition Liberal Democrats, included 32 members of Mr. Blair's Labor Party.

Foreign Secretary Jack Straw told the Commons that it would be ''utterly irresponsible'' to offer legislators a vote to pre-approve military action if it would put lives of British forces at risk.
