

A NATION AT WAR: COMBAT; HEAVY IRAQI LOSSES SEEN IN BIG BATTLE
By Patrick E. Tyler
March 26, 2003

American forces killed at least 150 Iraqi soldiers on Tuesday after being attacked in a swirling sandstorm about 100 miles south of Baghdad in what may be the biggest battle so far of the six-day-old war, senior American military officials said.

Soldiers from the Seventh Cavalry Regiment of the Third Infantry Division had moved to the east bank of the Euphrates River, near Najaf, when fedayeen militiamen and regular Iraqi soldiers attacked with rocket-propelled grenades and small-arms fire from pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles.

Before the exchange was finished, American forces had killed between 150 and 450 Iraqis, with more than 35 vehicles destroyed, according to various estimates from American officials. There was no word on American casualties.

The encounter appeared to have occurred below the point of the farthest advance of American troops, elements of which had made their way to within 50 miles of the capital before the blinding weather on Tuesday snarled the allied push north.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
This morning those sandstorms had eased, and heavy bombardment of Baghdad resumed. Large explosions were heard in the city center, where American military officials said Iraqi television had been struck by cruise missiles and knocked out.

In the south, where allied forces shifted their attention as they continued to meet strong resistance, British military officers reported the first signs of popular uprising in Basra, Iraq's second-largest city, as they fought Iraqi forces on the outskirts on Tuesday.

Maj. Gen. Peter Wall, second in command of British troops, said civilians in Basra had taken to the streets in significant numbers. ''We don't know what has spurred them,'' he said. ''We don't know the scale. We don't know the scope of it. We don't know where it will take us.''

Saddam Hussein's security forces and other irregular fighters used artillery and mortar fire against crowds who attacked them, military intelligence officials reported. There was no independent means to confirm those accounts.

In response to rapidly deteriorating conditions in the city, including severe shortages of water and medical supplies, British Army units began a new campaign of commando raids and tank and artillery attacks outside Basra.

At the outset of their campaign in the south, the British military authorities had said Basra was not a military objective. But they abruptly changed strategy on Tuesday as allied forces continued to meet determined resistance in cities throughout southern Iraq, leaving supply lines vulnerable for troops farther north.

Now securing Basra and its population has become a political and psychological objective for the allies of nearly equal importance with the larger showdown in central Iraq.

If the Shiites there can be induced to welcome the invading army and its goal of ousting Mr. Hussein, the grip on the country of the Iraqi leader may be severely weakened, allied officials say.

In London on Tuesday, Prime Minister Tony Blair, who was preparing to fly to Washington today for consultations on Iraq with President Bush, said Britain and the United States had in the past ''let down'' the predominantly Shiite Muslim population of southern Iraq after they rose against Mr. Hussein's rule in 1991 only to be brutally suppressed at the cost of tens of thousands of lives.

''My message to them today,'' Mr. Blair said, ''is that this time we will not let you down.''

Reports of an uprising in the city of 1.5 million people came after British warplanes bombed the Baath Party headquarters in the city.

In an early raid on Tuesday morning at Zubayr, a Basra suburb, British commandos seized the ''most senior'' official of the governing Baath Party in Basra and killed 20 of his aides and security guards, said a British army spokesman here, Lt. Col. Chris Vernon. He declined to identify the Iraqi official, but said he was under interrogation.

Iraqi defenders stormed out of the city Tuesday morning, attacking to the south with tanks and armored vehicles in a surprise countermove against British forces. But the Royal Marines called in airstrikes that destroyed the attacking column with rocket fire, British officials said.

Amid fears of a relief crisis in Basra, where normal water supplies have been cut by 60 percent, the British Seventh Armored Brigade, known as the Desert Rats, took up positions on the outskirts for a possible dash into the center to destroy Iraqi irregulars estimated to number 1,000. Those forces appear to have been organized by the Baath Party command to keep control of the provincial capital.

Allied planes dropped leaflets with satellite telephone numbers, encouraging the Basra authorities to call to negotiate surrender. Opposition figures were encouraged to call for assistance.

Another British spokesman, at United States Central Command headquarters in Qatar, said the Basra uprising began in the afternoon ''against the Baath Party.''

''The ruling party responded by firing mortars at the crowd that was advancing towards them,'' said the spokesman, Alan Lockwood. ''Our artillery responded to that with shells and mortars.''

In Washington, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld sounded a note of caution over encouraging Basra's residents toward rebellion before allied forces were in a position to protect them. ''I am very careful about encouraging people to rise up,'' he said. ''We know there are people in those cities ready to shoot them if they try to rise up.''

Elsewhere in Iraq, allied bombers on Tuesday flew 1,400 missions across the country, focusing their attack on the Republican Guard division blocking the American approach to Baghdad and on the capital itself, military officials said.

An American F-16 fighter mistakenly attacked a Patriot missile battery protecting American forces near Najaf in central Iraq. But the Patriot crew escaped injury.

A second serviceman was declared dead of wounds suffered in a grenade attack on the 101st Airborne Division in which a member of the unit is accused. Maj. Gregory Stone of the Air Force, was pronounced dead Tuesday in Kuwait, the Idaho Air National Guard in Boise said. The major, 40, was based in Boise.

Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, indicated on Tuesday that air attacks on the Medina Division of the Iraqi Republican Guard would be followed by a full-scale tank assault aimed at destroying the capital's outer ring of defenses.

''We've put helicopters against them, attack helicopters; we've put air against them; we've put some artillery against them; but we haven't engaged them in a classic battle,'' he said. ''Their mettle has not been tested. We're going to have to find out.''

The sandstorm that slowed the advance north of American armor toward Baghdad left the air in central Iraq an eerie orange. Only the silhouettes of tanks and other vehicles of war were visible.

''This is the worst I've ever seen,'' said Gunnery Sgt. Bob Gray, an 18-year Marine veteran who spent two years, off and on, in the Middle East. ''There will be lots of respiratory problems tomorrow.''

Poor visibility and two days of delay caused by fierce Iraqi attacks at Nasiriya raised the question of whether the marines would reach the Iraqi capital from the southeast before the main battle for Baghdad is fully joined.

Parts of the Army's Third Infantry Division were 50 miles from Baghdad, advancing from the southwest along the Euphrates River. They were already engaged in preliminary artillery exchanges with the Medina Division, military officials said. But the First Marine Expeditionary Force, also slated to be thrown against Baghdad, was still strewn in an endless convoy on the highway to Al Kut on the Tigris River.
