

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SUPPORT FOR HUSSEIN; A Show of Loyalty (Just Say Yes) In Iraq Vote for the One and Only
By John F. Burns
Oct. 16, 2002


If there is a reliable hard core to the support for Saddam Hussein among ordinary Iraqis, it is here on the baking flatlands of north-central Iraq, where the Iraqi leader was born.

So it was no surprise today that officials of the Ministry of Information provided a fleet of buses to bring foreign reporters 110 miles from Baghdad to watch Tikritis voting in a referendum on Mr. Hussein's presidency. Under Iraq's Constitution, the referendum serves as an election, but it has only one candidate -- Mr. Hussein.

Those marshaled outside polling places here were determined to leave nobody in any doubt as to Mr. Hussein's popularity. Hundreds of Tikritis in a state of near hysteria shouted ''Bush, Bush, listen, we love our great leader, President Saddam Hussein.''

The crowds gathered in Tikrit appeared to be in a trance, transported by their worship of Mr. Hussein, and by their contempt for President Bush, from the grim realities of everyday life in Iraq to a state of bliss.

Women carrying pins punctured their fingers so they could mark their ''yes'' votes in blood. Men followed suit, using the blunt edges of paper clips as makeshift knives to start the blood flowing.

One grandmother in a black cloak stormed onto one of the reporters' buses holding aloft a 10-day-old baby boy with a Saddam button pinned to his swaddling clothes, and shouting ''Yes, yes, yes to Saddam'' so forcefully it seemed she might faint.

Men danced with pistols held above their heads.

A man seized a reporter's notebook to write a personal message. ''Every 'yes' vote is a bullet in the chest of Bush the father and Bush the son,'' it said.

Voting is compulsory for all Iraqis over 18, and the ballot gives them a choice between ticking a box marked ''yes'' and a box marked ''no.'' Official results are expected Wednesday.

Much about the occasion seemed Orwellian, at least to those accustomed to Western-style democracies. In 1995, the first time such a referendum was held, official results gave Mr. Hussein a 99.96 percent ''yes'' vote, on a voter turnout of 99 percent. With nine million voters, that meant, taken literally, only about 3,600 Iraqis, give or take, spoiled their ballots or voted no.

Today, the organizers, and Tikrit's frenzied voters, left no doubt about the purpose of this exercise: delivering an even closer to perfect result from the current 11 million voters as a riposte to President Bush.

Mr. Hussein was born into a peasant family here in 1937, moved to Baghdad as a youth, then fled back to his hometown disguised as a woman after taking part in a failed assassination attempt against Iraq's first president in 1959, according to official biographies.

In the Iraqi leader's 23 years in power, Baghdad's inner circle has been top-heavy with Tikritis. The town, an agglomeration of the monumental buildings that have been the hallmark of Iraqi architecture under Mr. Hussein, has grown under his patronage from a scruffy trading post along the Tigris River to a memorial to his power.

The outcome of the vote is a foregone conclusion and will, in theory, keep Mr. Hussein in power for another seven years.

On the face of it, it might seem hard to believe that any exercise so plainly lacking in the basics of democracy as practiced in other parts of the world -- no opposition candidate, no election campaign, no public appearances by the secretive Mr. Hussein, and no semblance of secrecy in the balloting procedures -- could be regarded as anything but the illusionism of a profoundly authoritarian state.

But Iraqis approached the voting with a deadly earnestness, for many reasons, not least the importance of registering their loyalty to Mr. Hussein.

A distant comparison would be China during the Cultural Revolution 30 years ago. While the crowds then were vastly greater, the messianic fervor appeared to be much the same.

In Mao, China's Red Guards found a leader whose every word was the graven truth, and whose actions, however harsh, were embraced with unquestioning zeal.

The scenes today in Tikrit seemed to belie any assertion that Iraqis might welcome an American-led military invasion to topple Mr. Hussein. In Baghdad, the fervor was more constrained, and more obviously orchestrated.

The delirious voters included middle-aged men in business suits, young women fashionably dressed in trim skirts and blouses and sheiks in the gold-edged abaya cloaks and red-checkered kaffiyeh headdresses traditional among Bedouins.

In the bedlam around the ballot boxes, electoral decorum was abandoned as voters waved their ballots, checked or thumbprinted with blood in the box marked ''naam'' -- yes in Arabic -- for others' approval. At one point, a boy no older than 5 posted his own vote, to more shouts of ''Yes, yes, yes to Saddam.''

At one polling place, an official flourished a wad of about 30 ballots before stuffing them into the box.

At the end of the day, a question that remained unanswered was how the triumphal tally for Mr. Hussein would be assured. A delay of several hours after the polls closed suggested that a count was in progress, though there was no way of checking its accuracy.

Election officials were eager to demonstrate that the individual ballots carried no markings or numbering -- beyond a handwritten entry recording the district and polling place -- that would allow the government to identify those voting ''no.''

As a technical matter, the largest inhibition to a negative vote appeared to be the voters' habit of holding their marked ballot up for inspection, but even that gesture was not universal, with some voters folding their ballots before they reached the box.

A more likely explanation appeared to lie in the seemingly closed system of reasoning voters brought to the process.

All day long, Western reporters pressed their questions: How could Iraq describe the voting as democratic when there was only one candidate? How could it be that all but a tiny handful of people, in a country with a turbulent history and deep differences between religious and ethnic groups, found anything to object to in the leadership of Mr. Hussein? What, if not fear of retribution by the state, made Iraqis behave so different politically from people in other countries, with their preference for a choice of candidates and parties? What would happen if somebody openly declared his intention to vote no?

The Tikritis listened to it all with courtesy, along with what sounded very much like incredulity -- whether at the reporters' naïveté in asking questions to which they knew the answers only too well, or out of genuine puzzlement, was beyond knowing.

At a polling place deep in the desert outside the town, a Bedouin chief, Saban al-Asher al-Hassan, sat in a tent surrounded by tribal elders, who uttered their approbation, chorus-style, as he batted away the skeptical questions, mostly with the argument that Iraq, and its political traditions, were not to be compared with any other country in the world.

With sand blowing on the wind stinging his visitors' faces, another of the Bedouin chiefs, Adil Rezurky, finally closed off the discussion with what amounted to his ace-in-the-hole.

''Of course this is a democratic process,'' the 60-year-old tribal chief said. ''Iraqis know Saddam Hussein to be one of the great leaders of the world, so what reason would they have not to choose him? With a leader such as this, how could Iraqis want to say anything but yes?''
