

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE FIREFIGHTERS; Oil Teams Recall Kuwait And Fear Iraq May Be Worse
By Neela Banerjee
Jan. 24, 2003

On a scrap of windswept prairie 7,000 miles from the Persian Gulf, in a small office where two stag trophies gaze down from the walls, Ronnie Roles is preparing for an American invasion of Iraq.

Mr. Roles is president of operations for Cudd Pressure Control, one of the three American companies that extinguished hundreds of oil well fires in Kuwait after the Persian Gulf war and have lately been in touch with the Pentagon about similar service in Iraq.

Like his counterparts at the other companies, Boots & Coots International Well Control and Wild Well Control, Mr. Roles is making sure that men and equipment in the United States and around the world can be sent to Iraq at a moment's notice. Bush administration officials and oil industry executives now worry that Saddam Hussein could similarly torch Iraq's oil fields if the United States attacks, just as retreating Iraqi troops blew up 700 of Kuwait's 1,000 oil wells in 1991, sinking the country into a months-long night of roiling fires and black skies.

For all their experience in such danger, the firefighting companies say Iraq could pose extraordinary new challenges. No one in the industry has worked on oil wells tainted by chemical or biological weapons. No one wants to enter booby-trapped fields. And no one is quite sure who will pay for salvaging Iraq's vast oil reserves, the second largest in the world after Saudi Arabia's.

''Initially, the problems would probably be the same as in Kuwait,'' Mr. Roles said, ''whether there are working airports, or water nearby to fight the fires. But with the fields there in Saddam's backyard, will he cause more problems with things like mines at the wells?''

A Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Dan Heplage, declined to comment on any contact with oil firefighting companies, saying the Defense Department did not discuss contingency plans or talks with private companies unless a contract is signed. ''But it is part of our job to be ready for different situations,'' he added.

The Bush administration says that restoring Iraq's oil production is paramount to the United States' long-term interests in the country and the Middle East. Revenue from oil exports would be crucial to reviving the economy if Mr. Hussein is ousted, and a healthy economy, in turn, would shore up political stability. So if Iraq's oil industry were damaged -- a possibility very much on the minds of American military planners -- companies that battle fires would need to get to the fields fast to limit the destruction.

''It's not unimaginable that the war effort would still be going on while we're in there,'' said Jerry L. Winchester, the president and chief operating officer of Boots & Coots, based in Houston.

Oil field firefighters make no secret of the thrill they get from walking into danger. Though the legendary Red Adair is no longer in business, the men who run this generation of companies are all his protégés. They are the rock stars in an industry that has become increasingly tame, high-tech and climate controlled. Yet there are fewer fires and blowouts than there used to be. Of the 40 to 60 emergencies that Wild Well Control handles every year, only about 6 of them rage into fires, its chief executive, Pat Campbell, said.

Kuwait turned out to be like nothing the companies had ever seen, and Iraq could be worse, executives said. When Iraq invaded, Kuwaiti oil executives who had fled into exile and Western well-control companies were able to work together in anticipation of the sabotage of Kuwaiti fields. Those Kuwaitis who stayed in their occupied country reported back to their old bosses that the Iraqis were placing explosives on the wells, Mr. Campbell recalled. The executives and the Westerners thought Mr. Hussein might damage a couple of hundred wells at most.

In March 1991, when the first teams of firefighters arrived, they thought they had walked into a version of hell, Mr. Winchester said. ''You're used to pulling up to a location and seeing one well on fire, not 80, and you know there's another 80 out there and a few hundred behind those.''

The fires roared louder than jet engines. Smoke blotted out the sky. Oil pooled in lakes in the desert. Allied forces had bombed the Iraqi troops in the Kuwaiti fields, leaving behind thousands of unexploded cluster bombs that were quickly camouflaged in shifting sands. Escaping troops seized the earth-moving equipment the firefighters would need to control the wells. And there was little water to use.

Experts initially estimated that it would take four or five years to extinguish the fires. Instead, the job was completed in nine months. The firefighting companies, executives said, had some good luck and a great deal of help -- both of which could be hard to find in Iraq.

Iraq's fields are all over a sprawling country, Mr. Campbell said, with some in the swampy south or the mountainous north, where it may prove hard to ship the huge equipment needed. Kuwait's flat desert terrain made shipments relatively easy.

As prolific as some Kuwaiti wells are, there are Iraqi wells that produce more oil. If they were blown up, they might be harder to control, and the oil spills from them more difficult to contain. ''That's a big environmental nightmare,'' said Bill Mahler, marketing manager at Wild Well Control.

Firefighters do not expect help from Iraqi oil officials. The Kuwaitis piped in water from the sea that the firefighters used to put down the flames. But many Iraqi fields are far from rivers and lakes; it is unclear where water would come from.

The Kuwaiti military, along with Allied forces, helped clear ordnance and debris, but the well-control companies are keenly aware that if they go to Iraq, they may well encounter great hostility toward Americans.

They have worked in dangerous places before. Mr. Roles recounted how the military in Algeria always accompanied his men to damaged wells in the 1990's, at the height of the country's vicious if low-grade civil conflict. But no one welcomes another layer of danger beyond what there already is at the wells, executives said.

''Our conversations with the government on this are very brief,'' Mr. Campbell said. ''We say, 'Make it safe, and we'll be there.' And they say, 'We will.' But I haven't lasted in this business 30 years because I believe what some guy in an office says.''

The Kuwaiti mission was very lucrative for well-control companies, Mr. Winchester said. The industry is unsure who will pay to repair the Iraqi oil fields -- the United States government, the United Nations or the Iraqis themselves once their fields were operational again.

''I don't know, and I don't know if anyone else knows yet,'' Mr. Roles said. ''The government hasn't volunteered and said, 'We'll pick up the bill.' ''

And there remains the slight hope that Iraqi troops, while ready to destroy their neighbor's riches, would balk at destroying their own. ''Saddam might blow up his own wells if he felt he had nothing left to lose, but the Iraqis themselves might not do that if they feel he is on his way out,'' Mr. Campbell said. ''That should be everyone's hope. But for thinking that all that could not, should not happen, after standing in the middle of the fires in Kuwait, I can't really say, 'Never.' ''
