
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRITAIN; Blair's Stand on Iraq Hurts Him Politically but Seems Unlikely to Topple Him
By Warren Hoge
Feb. 21, 2003

Prime Minister Tony Blair calls the disarming of Saddam Hussein a ''life or death issue,'' and many Britons are saying the same about his political future if he continues his hard-line stance on Iraq and his championing of President Bush.

In the latest censure from an influential sector of British life, Mr. Blair was faulted today by the spiritual leader of the Church of England, the Most Rev. Rowan Williams, archbishop of Canterbury, and the head of the Catholic Church in England and Wales, Cardinal Cormac Murphy-O'Connor, for saying that war against Iraq was morally justified.

The two men, leaders respectively of the world's 70 million Anglicans and Britain's four million Catholics, said in a statement that the prime minister's assertion lacked ''moral legitimacy.''

Mr. Blair's position on Iraq has put him at odds with a majority of voters and a significant number of outspoken members of his own Labor Party who believe that he is overly obedient to Washington. They also accuse him of single-minded absorption with Iraq and blame him for neglecting the daily life problems that his government pledged to focus on, like poor transportation, inattentive health services and rising crime.

His aggressive projection of Britain's authority globally through its alliance with Washington has undermined another cherished objective of his New Labor government -- leveraging the country's power on the Continent and establishing Britain as a bridge between Europe and the United States. Though he appeals to Britons to recognize that he is acting from sincere conviction, his popularity keeps plummeting.

''Nobody trusts him anymore,'' said Robert M. Worcester, chairman of the MORI polling organization. ''People laugh nowadays when he says, 'Trust me, I'm a straight sort of fellow.' He's played that card too many times.''

Yet Mr. Blair gives off none of the airs of a desperate man. He calmly takes on his critics in parliamentary debates, news conferences and television interviews and expresses confidence that Britain and the United States can obtain a second Security Council resolution authorizing the use of force in Iraq.

He has the luxury of having as his political opposition the Conservatives, who are too weak to challenge his hold on government and who actually favor his position on Iraq.

He believes that United Nations approval would restore his standing at home and end predictions that he is in jeopardy of losing his party's leadership and his job.

Public opinion surveys seem to validate the view. The same polls that portray a majority of Britons as opposing war show that three-quarters of them would back force if authorized by the United Nations.

British diplomats are aggressively pursuing that goal, and Mr. Blair held a 30-minute conversation with Mr. Bush on Wednesday mapping strategy to produce a new resolution within a week devised to obtain the maximum support from the Security Council's 15 members.

Mr. Blair has sent planes, a naval task force and more than 30,000 troops to the Persian Gulf region, and it is a political given in London that Britain will be obliged to accompany the United States into combat.

Going to war without allied backing or United Nations sanction could isolate Mr. Blair at home and across Europe and end up punishing him for his loyalty to the Bush administration. Mr. Bush's patience with Mr. Blair regarding his wish for time to win over reluctant countries like France, Russia and China, which have veto power in the Security Council, could have a lot to do with Mr. Blair's political future.

''The fact is that the one reliable ally who will be with us, no matter what, desperately needs U.N. backing,'' said Dana H. Allin, senior fellow for trans-Atlantic affairs at the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies.

Whether Washington will come to Mr. Blair's rescue, Mr. Allin said, is an open question. ''I think the Bush administration appreciates what he has done, but I don't know whether they realize that he is the last man standing between America having allies and America going it alone,'' Mr. Allin said.

Recent evidence of Washington's willingness to give Mr. Blair protective cover does not encourage British officials. The prime minister came away empty-handed from his last visit to the White House, on Jan. 31, when he tried to convince Mr. Bush of the importance of re-energizing the lapsed Middle East peace negotiations, a critical concern in London.

Mr. Blair believes that the perception of a disengaged and less than evenhanded American approach in the Middle East complicates the effort to build support there and in Europe for action against Iraq.

He said at a news conference on Tuesday that a large part of his talks with the president had been devoted to the subject. But asked what evidence he had that Washington had taken his message seriously, he was able to say only that Mr. Bush was sincere about the need for progress in the Middle East and to remind reporters that Mr. Bush had been the first American president to formally endorse a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Mr. Blair is uncritical of Mr. Bush himself, but others in his government say the president's blunt manner is a liability for them in Britain.

One aide cited Mr. Bush's comparison of President Hussein to a rerun of a bad movie as something that might strike Americans as folksy and direct but were seen by Europeans as flippant and disdainful.

In fact, even the worst case in Iraq for Mr. Blair -- a war without United Nations or allied backing that ends badly -- would not be likely to cost him his career, though it could deeply damage his authority. A successful outcome to such a war, on the other hand, could end up enhancing his stature. ''People predicting his demise forget that there was a lot of feeling at the time of Kosovo and Afghanistan that this was not the kind of thing that the Brits should be involved in, but Blair pushed ahead in both those instances and he came out looking pretty good,'' said Anthony King, professor of government at Essex University.

As for any revolt from inside the prime minister's own party, Gordon Brown, the chancellor of the Exchequer, is the only person capable of supplanting him, and he has publicly supported Mr. Blair on the war and would gain no political advantage from its failure.

The Conservative Party is in disarray, unable to exploit Mr. Blair's weakness, with its own untested and beleaguered leader, Iain Duncan Smith, fighting an internal battle to remain in charge.

Mr. King said that even though a bad outcome would consequently not cost Mr. Blair his position, it would ''radically change his premiership.''

''So far Tony Blair has been a very dominant prime minister who has had to pay attention to his chancellor but to no one else,'' Mr. King said, ''and certainly not to his cabinet. He would have to become a far more collegial figure than he has been, and he would be forced to listen to other people.''

Mr. Blair's critics in Parliament have pressed for a vote on whether to send British troops into combat, but Mr. Blair has promised them their say only once British forces are committed.

''If Blair commits British troops,'' Mr. Worcester said, ''with or without U.N. sanction, the moment they are on the ground, 'Tommy has gone to war,' and the British public is going to swing behind him.''
