

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Hearing War Drums, Iraqis Still March to Their Own Beat
By Neil MacFarquhar
Feb. 28, 2003

A revival of the classic ''Epic of Gilgamesh'' is scheduled to open in about two weeks at the Rashid Theater in downtown Baghdad.

The troupe, rehearsing every afternoon in a dusty, ill-lighted space upstairs at the government-run General Organization for Theater and Cinema, realizes that its ancient odyssey about life and death along the Euphrates may be overshadowed by an all-too-vivid, modern version right outside at just about the same time.

''If the war happens, we will present the play, even if we only draw a small audience,'' said Kasim Al-Sumary, the director, optimistic that a few brave souls might wander abroad even in the face of an American attack. ''If we only thought about war, we could not go on with the rehearsals.''

By and large, the sprawling city of Baghdad remains doggedly serene. Unhindered by fears, honking wedding parties weave through the broad, well-lighted streets late into the night. For a while crowds mobbed the main passport office, but few really possess the means to flee. The government distributed six months of basic food rations in advance -- so much that people groan about lacking storage space and fend off their neighborhood distributor when he offers more.

President Saddam Hussein warned the population Wednesday night to start excavating trenches in their yards as bomb shelters. There was no sign today that anybody was responding with alacrity. Over all the drumbeat of war -- quieter in a country without ready access to satellite television -- elicits little more than a collective shrug.

''Look at the streets. The marriages! The dancing!'' exclaimed Mohammed Shukri Jameel, an accomplished Iraqi film director, at least until 1991, when moviemaking ground to a halt because sanctions and poverty interrupted the import of film and the chemicals needed to develop it. ''No one is paying any notice to the fact that they may be facing one of the greatest wars in history. They just don't care.''

The recent groundswell of diplomatic maneuvering and worldwide demonstrations has given many Iraqis a sense that doomsday had been postponed. Still, digging wells to supplement the water supply has developed into a booming business.

Dr. Akil Mohammed Jamil, a dentist, stood with a few onlookers in his middle-class neighborhood one recent afternoon, watching three men from the local soccer squad and their foreman dig a well by hand.

''Hit oil yet?'' joked one bystander.

''Try to avoid the sewer,'' added another.

Using a kind of rotating shovel, it takes them about six hours to dig a well roughly 30 feet deep, and they have been doing two a day for weeks.

''I don't think the American people are coming to the region to play football; they are coming to kill people, to control people,'' said Dr. Jamil. He does not want to abandon his house this time, as he did in 1991, afraid that thieves might sack the place in the chaos that could envelop Baghdad.

The water is considered too brackish and chemical for drinking, but people expect to use it for bathing and cleaning the house. Some are dubious even about that.

''Those well diggers are giving me a headache,'' said Adel Abdel Amir, a 71-year-old retired judge. He pointed out that they claimed that the somewhat rusty hand pump with its chipped green paint was both new and Italian. He knows it is neither, and worse, the water is terribly salty. ''It's up to God, there's nothing I can do about it.''

Where preparations lag, many resort to prayer.

Hundreds of worshipers flock to dusk prayers in the white marble courtyard of the Imam Musa Al-Khadim shrine, the gold-domed burial place of two of the holiest men in the Shiite branch of Islam.

The main attraction is a diminutive white-bearded man in a flowing black robe, Imam Hussein Sadr, whose black turban signals his descent from the family of the Prophet Muhammad. Considered the leading Shiite religious scholar in the country, he draws worshipers seeking his guidance about war.

Owda Hassan Al-Hashimi, 50, traveled from Basra to ask about fighting foreign invaders.

''I wanted to know what is the correct position on jihad if the enemy enters the country,'' he said. ''The sayyid answered that we should undertake jihad against any power that enters Iraq.''

On the sidelines of the prayers, two men accosted a foreign visitor to ask his views about impending war. Upon learning he was American, one began to spout the party line.

''We are not afraid of your White House,'' he said.

''Are you kidding? We are very afraid,'' said his friend. ''Tell the truth.''

The first man retorted with the most common analysis heard here: that American pressure for war is a thinly disguised land grab in the service of oil and Israel. ''The real reason is to break Iraq as they broke Egypt,'' he said. ''There are only two countries in the Middle East that are dangerous to Israel; they managed to sideline Egypt and now they are trying break the hands and legs of Iraq to protect Israel.''

It is difficult to gauge whether Iraqis will indeed fight. Most people here who are asked seem determined to stay behind closed doors at home. But Mr. Hussein has been appearing frequently on television, shown listening to military officers talking about their preparedness.

The night before his admonishment about digging a household trench, Mr. Hussein met with police officers from around the country.

''We will be fighting with one hand and organizing the traffic with the other,'' the commander of the traffic police reported. Mr. Hussein, ignoring the comment about fighting, said the traffic police should work at bettering themselves.

''I think you should read more, guys,'' he said.

Diplomats report that envoys who have met Mr. Hussein find him calm, self-assured, in apparently good health and seemingly fully conscious of the tremendous obstacles he faces.

He appeared that way tonight on television, when the full interview that he gave to CBS News was broadcast here. Remarkably, it showed him answering questions including whether he would prefer death here over life in exile.

Arab visitors find that Iraqis, even those close to the ruling circle, are more prone to offer criticism about events like the 1990 invasion of Kuwait than they were six months ago. But any question about support for changing the government draws a quick response that nobody wants to be an American colonial subject.

''They said the same thing when they overthrew the king in 1958, that life would get better, and look what that brought us,'' said one Iraqi intellectual. ''War is far worse than the benefits of any change, and besides, the United States always leaves things worse than they found them.''

The foreign diplomatic community is dwindling. Just four Western European embassies are functioning, those of France, Italy, Germany and Greece. Turkey closed its embassy this week as its Parliament discussed a bill that would open the way for the deployment of American troops on its soil. The Russian Embassy also sent dependents home.

Iraqis, on the other hand, seem to be avoiding contingency plans.

''We are still planning to finish the syllabus at the normal time at the end of June,'' said Abdul Sattar Jawad, the head of the English Literature Department at Baghdad University, teaching the Coleridge poem, Kubla Khan, to his students this week. ''Classes were interrupted for 17 days in 1991, but we went ahead even though there were missiles roaring on the horizon.''
