
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE U.N. DIPLOMACY; U.S.-FRENCH SPLIT ON IRAQ DEEPENS
By Julia Preston With Eric Schmitt
Oct. 15, 2002


The impasse between the United States and France over military action in Iraq has deepened in recent days after an effort to reach a compromise stalled, with the French insisting that the Americans must come back to the United Nations Security Council before they can use force, diplomats said today.

While the United States and France pressed their positions, diplomats from several Security Council nations said they were still hoping to avoid a damaging, permanent rift over Iraq, and President Bush spoke in conciliatory terms, insisting that the negotiations were still moving forward.

''We are working with all the parties to get a resolution done,'' he said at the White House as he departed for Michigan.

''Anything we do must make it very clear that Saddam must disarm, or there will be consequences,'' he added, referring to President Saddam Hussein.

But, Mr. Bush emphasized, ''The use of the military is my last choice, is my last desire.''

As part of their effort to explore all options short of war, senior administration officials said they were trying to foment an uprising in Iraq, a strategy they had dismissed as recently as last spring.

Congressional officials said the Central Intelligence Agency had already begun covert operations in the Kurdish area of northern Iraq. And military officials said the Pentagon planned to start a psychological operations campaign, which would probably include broadcasts and leaflet drops in coming weeks urging Iraqi military leaders to defect or rise up against Mr. Hussein.

The steps were being taken as diplomats at the United Nations reported that more than a month of top-level diplomacy has so far failed to bring the major powers on the Security Council closer together on the tough resolution favored by the United States and Britain.

The United States and Britain want one resolution that includes tough new conditions for weapons inspectors in Iraq and an authorization to use force should the Iraqis refuse to disarm. France wants any authorization to use force in a second resolution. Russia and China have leaned to the French view.

As the veto-bearing permanent members of the Security Council, those five nations are crucial to the effort to forge an internationally accepted policy on Iraq. Several Council nations said they wanted to see a resolution come to a vote before the end of next week.

France has prepared an alternative proposal to that of the United States, but has been using it primarily to try to coax Washington closer to its position, diplomats said. Both sides believe they could win a majority of the 15 Council votes.

Repeated telephone calls from Mr. Bush to presidents of veto-bearing Council nations, including Jacques Chirac of France and Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, and almost daily conversations between top diplomats from those countries have produced no significant movement, diplomats said.

French and American diplomats searched for a compromise in talks last week, Council diplomats said, discussing word changes in the United States draft resolution that would soften the threat of force to a warning of ''serious consequences.''

But they did not reach agreement, because France was not convinced that the new terms meant Washington was ready to come back to the Council for another vote before starting a military assault, the diplomats said.

Several permanent Council members do not agree with Washington's proposals for security guards from other countries for the inspectors and for the Council powers to attach their own experts to the United Nations weapons teams.

Pressure is building for the United States to come forward officially with the resolution it drafted with Britain.

The nations that do not hold seats on the 15-member Security Council have pushed the Council to hold an open debate on Iraq that will begin on Wednesday. Hans Blix, head of the United Nations weapons inspections team, has said he hopes to get to work in Iraq as close as possible to Oct. 19, the date that Baghdad offered to receive the advance team.

Meanwhile, American officials say they are exploring options short of war. One official, who was involved in drafting Mr. Bush's speech a week ago in Cincinnati, said today that an appeal to Iraq's generals not to use chemical or biological weapons was inserted ''quite deliberately.''

The president's remarks followed the suggestion from Mr. Bush's press secretary, Ari Fleischer, that ''a single bullet'' could be a quick way for the Iraqi people to avoid a major conflict with the United States and its allies.

The shift toward encouraging a coup is a contrast to statements last spring, when senior officials were openly dismissive of any hope of prompting a rebellion within Iraq, noting that it had been tried at least six times in the 1990's, always unsuccessfully.

Now, their tone has changed as the administration pursues what it says is an effort to exhaust all options short of war.

Senior military and intelligence officials said there were no signs of fissures in the Iraqi leadership yet. But administration officials talk of either a ''pre-emptive'' coup by Iraqi military leaders who fear for their survival after an American-led invasion, or a coup attempt that might begin shortly after the start of any military offensive.

The administration's talk last week of a military occupation of Iraq that included war-crimes trials may offer another incentive for military leaders to switch sides.

''There is no way to put a meaningful percentage on the chances of a coup,'' said a senior administration official who has examined the issue. ''Remember, there were all sorts of experts in the intelligence community at the end of the gulf war who thought Saddam would last six months after his defeat, and some of them are still writing our estimates. But you have to be prepared for the chance, and prepared to take advantage of senior defectors, even if there is not a full, successful coup.''

In a telephone interview today, Senator Richard C. Shelby, the ranking Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee, said, ''There's got to be unrest in the higher echelons of Saddam Hussein's regime, in his officer corps, and the Republican Guard,'' the elite units that protect Baghdad. ''They're watching CNN and reading British and American papers day by day. They know something big is going to happen, and their chances of survival are in question.''

In an interview on Saturday in his Pentagon office, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld noted that replacing Mr. Hussein with another hard-line general or Baath Party official would not satisfy the administration's goal of disarming Iraq.

He added: ''If Saddam Hussein were to wake up in the morning and decide he'd prefer to live elsewhere, and took with him his family and his regime -- the small number of associates who obviously have been involved with his repression and the development of his programs -- and left'' it might solve the problem.

But, he said, Iraq would still have to get rid of any weapons of mass destruction, avoid terrorist groups and be a peaceful neighbor, he added.

Douglas J. Feith, the undersecretary of defense for policy, told foreign journalists last week that the administration was seeking to exploit potential divisions in Iraq.

''We believe that officials and military officers will think twice about fulfilling orders, in the event of a conflict,'' he said, arguing that ''if there were to be a military conflict, there is no question about how it would come out.''
