
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DEBATE; Chief U.N. Inspector Backs U.S., Demanding Full Iraq Disclosure
By Todd S. Purdum and David Firestone
Oct. 5, 2002


The chief United Nations weapons inspector, Hans Blix, today endorsed the main demand of the United States that Iraq make a full declaration of its weapons programs before inspections resume.

After an hourlong meeting with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other officials, Mr. Blix said that there was ''very broad support'' in the Security Council for a new resolution setting tough terms for inspections. He also endorsed the threat of consequences if Iraq fails to disarm, saying, ''I think it is clear that there has to be constant pressure'' to make Baghdad comply.

Iraq is still hoping to arrange for inspections under less stringent conditions than those Mr. Blix has endorsed, but the pressure on Baghdad is rising. Senior members of the United States Senate opened debate today on President Bush's request for a Congressional resolution authorizing him to use military force if Iraq does not comply with international demands.

Mr. Bush called Saddam Hussein a ''cold-blooded killer'' and made clear that he expected the United Nations to be firm. ''If the United Nations won't make the decision, if Saddam Hussein continues to lie and deceive, the United States will lead a campaign to disarm this man before he harms America,'' he said. The White House also said the president would address the nation on the topic Monday evening.

Even before the meeting with Mr. Blix took place, the Pentagon spokeswoman, Victoria Clarke, warned that any inspections would be difficult, if not impossible, to carry out because Iraq was going to extreme lengths to conceal its arsenals. ''It is a very organized, very comprehensive effort,'' she said, one that that includes ''inputs and guidance from the highest levels.''

The Central Intelligence Agency said that Iraq had taken advantage of the withdrawal of United Nations weapons inspectors in 1998 to resume its production of chemical arms, expand efforts to develop biological weapons and revive its program to make nuclear arms.

In the Senate, passionate arguments were unleashed for and against military action, foreshadowing a week of contentious debate.

''This is one of the greater debates in the contemporary history of the Senate,'' said Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, who will be leading the Republican case for the resolution sought by Mr. Bush. [Excerpts, Page A9.]

In a long floor speech, Mr. Warner outlined the administration's case for removing Saddam Hussein from power, citing both Iraq's possession of and willingness to use chemical and biological weapons.

''We have to demonstrate a resolve within our nation to communicate to Saddam Hussein the clear message that enough is enough,'' said Mr. Warner, the ranking Republican on the Armed Services Committee. ''He has to be convinced that American and international resolve is real, unshakable and enforceable if there's to be a peaceful resolution. But if diplomacy fails, we have to be prepared to act.''

Mr. Blix's hourlong meeting with Secretary Powell also involved other top administration officials, including the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice; Deputy Defense Secretary Paul L. Wolfowitz; and Vice President Dick Cheney's chief of staff, I. Lewis Libby. After his meeting, Mr. Blix said said he agreed with the administration's view that any further inspections should await a new resolution from the Security Council that emphasized Iraq's need ''to give a clear declaration of what they have.''

Such a declaration is a central demand of the draft resolution supported by the United States and Britain. By embracing it publicly, Mr. Blix put renewed pressure not only on Iraq but also on France and Russia, the two members of the Security Council with the most questions about any new resolution. Mr. Blix did not offer a view on other issues, including an explicit threat to use force, which continues to be the subject of debate and negotiations among Security Council members.

Still, Mr. Blix came closer than he ever has in explicitly endorsing the American-British resolution, saying, ''the Security Council resolution now being discussed is one that I think we would welcome.'' He said it ''could further clarify matters.''

The meeting at the State Department with Mr. Blix and Mohamed el-Baradei, the director-general of the International Atomic Energy Agency came as the Bush administration kept up its efforts for a new Security Council resolution amid conflicting diplomatic signals.

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said that inspectors should go back to Iraq as soon as possible, while the deputy foreign minister, Yuri Fedotov, was quoted by the ITAR-Tass news agency as saying ''the existing Security Council resolutions on the Iraqi problem are quite sufficient.''

But Bush administration officials insisted that they were making progress behind the scenes on a new resolution that would specify clear terms for inspectors and at least threaten consequences for noncompliance. The French support a two-stage process, in which the Security Council would first set new inspection guidelines and then have a second debate about possible punishment if Iraq resisted.

There were some signs today that the State Department was prepared to consider a two-step process under certain terms.

While embracing the administration's desire that Iraq make an up-front declaration of the weapons it possesses, Mr. Blix made no mention of other more controversial proposals the administration has sought, including armed escorts for inspectors, the right of the permanent members of the Security Council to send their own inspectors with him and nominate their own targets for inspection. That would be departures from past practice.

The meeting with Mr. Blix was intended to show solidarity from all parts of the administration for a tough new inspections regime. But some internal divisions apparently remain, since just hours earlier Ms. Clarke, the Pentagon spokeswoman, sounded her skeptical warning about the difficulty of any inspections.

On Capitol Hill there was a sense that the outcome of the debate that began today was all but preordained. Still, several Democrats engaged Mr. Warner with questions about what Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia denounced as the ''blank check'' requested by the president.

For nearly an hour on a warm October afternoon, with only a handful of spectators in the gallery, Mr. Warner and Mr. Byrd engaged in an animated colloquy over the right of the United States to conduct an unprovoked strike against a foreign power. Citing American history and classical precedent, two men with 66 years in the Senate between them neatly framed the differences that have arisen in Washington and the nation.

''The Bush administration wants Congress to put its stamp of approval on the Bush doctrine of preemptive strikes,'' said Mr. Byrd, whipping out his copy of the Constitution and insisting that it did not authorize such military action. ''Are we going to present the face of America as the face of a bully that's ready to go out at high noon with both guns blazing, or maintain the face of America as a country that believes in justice and the rule of law, freedom, liberty and the rights of all people to work out their ultimate destiny?''

But Mr. Warner said the history books were full of American military actions that were taken in the absence of a direct attack on the United States. Beginning with the Colombia-Panama engagement of 1901, he said, presidents have dispatched troops more than a dozen times in ways that could be considered preemptive, including more recent interventions in Panama, Somalia and Kosovo.
