
THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITARY; In Iraqi No-Flight Zones, 12 Years of Containment May End in Bombardment
By Dexter Filkins
Jan. 25, 2003

Through a long season of undeclared war, America's pilots have spent so much time in the skies over Iraq that some of them have passed most of their careers there.

Mike, the lieutenant commander of an EA-6B Prowler squadron, for instance, is on his fourth tour patrolling the no-flight zones, the novel creations erected over northern and southern Iraq 12 years ago.

Several times a week, Mike, who is prevented by base regulations from giving his last name, climbs into his radar-jamming jet, flies into the skies over northern Iraq and maneuvers himself safely back to his Turkish base. On most days, Mike and his comrades are the target of Iraqi anti-aircraft guns, but on most days, the skies remain clear of Iraqi planes.

''It's pretty much the same thing every day,'' said the lieutenant commander, who flew his first mission as a Navy pilot during the Persian Gulf war in 1991. ''I joined the Navy to see the world, but my entire naval career has been dedicated to Iraq. I am ready for something new.''

The no-flight zones have proved a remarkable, if limited, success, preventing the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein from sending his air forces into northern and southern Iraq to attack the region's Kurdish and Shiite populations. In the north, especially, the Kurds have flourished, enjoying a respite from the relentless campaigns waged against them over the years by the Iraqi President.

But now, as the Bush administration prepares to invade Iraq, the no-flight zones sit on the edge of political oblivion, the very symbols of the idea, now scorned, that Mr. Hussein's ambitions could be contained without war.

The American pilots who fly the tightly controlled missions over Iraq, where their freedom to engage Mr. Hussein's forces is sharply limited, may be soon be called to go on the offensive.

As a result, the no-flight zones are now being seen as a training ground for the very pilots who may be called upon to attack Iraq. With a 700 percent annual turnover rate among pilots who patrol the areas, nearly all of America's combat pilots, by some estimates, have already flown missions over Iraq.

At the same time, American pilots are now conducting mock bombing runs on likely Iraqi targets, and have been authorized to attack a broader array of targets if they are fired upon.

''Just about every aircraft carrier wing, and the vast majority of tactical Air Force fliers, have had exposure to northern and southern Iraq,'' said Rear Adm. Stephen H. Baker, retired, senior fellow at the Center for Defense Information in Washington.

''They're used to the environment. They are used to getting shot at. They have experience and understanding of how the Iraqi air defense network works.''

The no-flight zones were declared by the United States in the aftermath of the gulf war in 1991, when Mr. Hussein, clinging to power, launched attacks against the country's rebellious Kurdish and Shiite populations. In response, the United States vowed to shoot down any Iraqi warplane crossing the 33rd parallel in the south and the 36th parallel in the north.

It was an unusual experiment in containment, making use of America's prowess in air power while avoiding the perils of maintaining an army on the ground.

Mr. Hussein has refused to recognize the no-flight zones, calling them an illegal infringement on Iraq's sovereignty. American military officials say their planes are fired on nearly every time they cross into Iraqi airspace, usually by relatively inaccurate anti-aircraft guns but often with missiles.

While the Iraqis have managed to shoot down at least one unpiloted Predator drone, they have failed so far to destroy a single American plane since the war.

''We call it the golden BB,'' said one American pilot here. ''They are praying for that lucky shot.''

For all the shooting, the latitude of American pilots to attack Iraqi targets is limited to cases of self-defense. But some of the rules have been loosened. Last fall, as the United States began preparations for a possible war against Iraq, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld authorized pilots to attack a broader range of targets, as well as to conduct mock bombing runs on likely Iraqi targets.

Few people on Incirlik Air Base, the home of the pilots who maintain the northern no-flight zone, are willing to speculate on the likelihood of a war with Iraq. But there are a few signs here that the base may be preparing for a sudden transformation. One day last week, each of the more than 2,000 American military personnel at the base took part in a ''mock attack'' drill, donning gas masks and suits designed to protect them from chemical and biological weapons. A team of 150 American military inspectors has been touring Incirlik and other Turkish bases and seaports to gauge their ability to support a large American military presence in the country.

Then, buried beneath the ground, there is the state-of-the-art medical ward designed to treat patients who have been contaminated by biological and chemical agents. The ward, which includes decontamination chambers, is itself prepared to withstand a chemical or biological attack.

For all the hints of an imminent conflict here, Incirlik Air Base exudes a businesslike atmosphere, a place where, according to a recent article in Air Force Magazine, crews have launched 21,000 flights over the past decade. There is no high-fiving by exuberant pilots after a mission, no scoreboards recording Iraqi targets destroyed. As much as anything here, the graffiti on the walls reflects the evolution, after 12 years, of an extraordinary enterprise into a day-to-day affair:

''18th Air Refueling Squadron,'' reads one of the insignias of the units that passed through the base here. ''Can do and did.''

''344th Refueling Squadron,'' reads another, ''Anytime, anywhere.''

To the newcomer, a single day's work at Incirlik seems a remarkable affair. As many as 18 times a month, the crews at the Incirlik base launch a fleet of fighter jets, refueling tankers and radar-jamming planes, all of them operating in intricately choreographed maneuvers at altitudes of more than 20,000 feet.

During a recent mission, a dozen American fighter jets pulled up behind a KC-135 tanker one at a time, each pulling close enough to the back of the plane to grasp the extended fuel pump while the others waited in a line off to the side.

The fighter planes flew to within 15 feet of the tanker, making eye contact possible and even the display of risqué photographs. Speaking into his radio, one F-16 pilot apologized for not flashing any of the photos this time out.

''I'm sorry I don't have any pictures for you today,'' the pilot said.

The pilot of the KC-135, a woman, wasted no time in answering.

''Next time, you can bring me a copy of Handyman magazine,'' she said.

For the rest of the day, the three crewmembers of the KC-135 continued with their duties, with no hint that the mission might soon be taking a sharp turn. The fighter jets outside continued queuing up like cars at a gas station.

By 1 p.m., with the fighter jets inside Iraqi airspace, the crew of the refueler was ready to call it a day.

''I think that does it for us,'' said the pilot, an Air Force major named Kim. ''We're heading in.''
