
THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTORS; Iraq Accepting A U.S. Demand Over Scientists
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 21, 2003

Iraq said today that it would urge its scientists to agree to private interviews with United Nations arms inspectors, bowing to a central American demand in advance of a report by the inspectors next week to the Security Council.

The undertaking by Iraq was among 10 specific commitments made today to the inspectors. Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector for chemical and biological weapons, called them ''positive steps'' toward better Iraqi cooperation with teams searching for weapons of mass destruction. [Text of statement, Page A9.]

''We need to come to an effective and credible inspection process,'' Mr. Blix told reporters here before leaving for Athens. ''We have come a long way on that. But there have been hitches on it, and some of these hitches have been solved today.''

Just a week before they are to deliver a crucial report on Iraq to the Security Council, the inspectors seemed to win most of what they were demanding in two days of high-level talks here with Iraqi officials that did not include a meeting with President Saddam Hussein.

By making the commitments, Iraq seemed intent on convincing members of the United Nations, particularly those in Europe wary of a United States-led attack, that Iraq is willing to compromise and that inspections need more time and are a better option than war.

Mr. Blix said that ''there are a number of points which otherwise would have been negative'' in the report that now will count in Iraq's favor if it follows through. But he cautioned, ''This is a big report, and there are many other matters in it.''

Under the terms of Security Council Resolution 1441, the Nov. 8 measure that set up the current tough weapons inspections, Iraq is required to ''cooperate fully'' with the inspections, and the inspectors are authorized to conduct interviews with Iraqi experts.

Up to now, Iraq has been blocking those interviews, making it clear to scientists that it wanted government officials to be present.

In several meetings late last year with Mr. Blix and Mohammad ElBaradei, his counterpart for nuclear weapons, Iraqi officials pledged that they would cooperate fully with the inspections. In practice, however, the inspectors have said, the only aspect of the inspections that has gone smoothly has been gaining access to Iraqi sites.

Still unsettled, both Mr. Blix and Dr. El-Baradei made clear, is the larger question of whether Iraq has presented sufficient evidence that it has indeed disarmed.

In a later interview, Mr. Blix rejected the suggestion that the report next Monday should be decisive. But he suggested that the United States might view the report that way.

''It is an update,'' he told several reporters in the interview. ''It is you guys who have made it into the end of history. And maybe some member states will make it the end of history. But for us, it's an update. We are supposed to report on how inspections go.''

The United States, with large numbers of troops already massed in the Persian Gulf region, has made clear that it will regard Mr. Blix's report as a critical test of whether Mr. Hussein is cooperating with the United Nations or persisting in what it says is a pattern of deception and obfuscation that may justify war.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said at the United Nations today that Iraq's pledges to the weapons inspectors were ''just more of the same,'' adding, ''Only under pressure does Iraq respond.''

''We cannot let them dribble this information, dribble these items out for as long as they choose to in an effort to thwart the will of the international community,'' he said.

Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, was equally skeptical, saying: ''We're only interested in actions. After 11 or 12 years of watching Saddam Hussein give his word and not keep it, his word is not as meaningful as his actions.''

Iraq, after two days of talks with the inspectors, said it would be more cooperative in several areas. The commitments made today appeared to amount to an attempt by the Iraqis to bring themselves into compliance with Resolution 1441.

The most sensitive issue for the Iraqis and one of the most important for the administration was that of interviews with Iraqi scientists, who so far have not been willing to speak with inspectors about weapons programs.

The commitment Iraq made today says scientists who are asked for interviews in private and without government ''minders'' will be ''encouraged to accept this.''

Amir al-Saadi, a top scientific aide to Mr. Hussein, said, ''It is in our interest to answer questions relevant to Iraq's programs, past programs, in that Iraq is clean.''

So far the inspectors have requested interviews with six scientists, and Mr. Blix said today that he expected that list to grow.

Mr. Saadi said scientists would be allowed to go abroad to speak with inspectors. Up to now, the Iraqi government has expressed opposition to such departures, and inspectors have said the fear of retribution to scientists and family members is a real bar to that actually happening.

The resolution says the inspectors ''may at their discretion conduct interviews inside or outside Iraq'' with scientists or other Iraqi officials. But Iraq has up to now balked, angering the Bush administration.

Such interviews could provide intelligence demonstrating that Mr. Hussein has hidden chemical or biological weapons and is still engaged, contrary to his repeated statements, in the quest to obtain nuclear arms.

Iraq also said today that it would begin a further search for 122-millimeter warheads that deliver chemical weapons. On Thursday inspectors uncovered 12 such weapons, empty and old but not declared previously to the United Nations. Then on Sunday night, Iraq itself admitted to uncovering four more. American officials have called the discoveries ''troubling.''

The Iraqis further agreed not to follow United Nations helicopters into the no-flight zones in the north and south patrolled by American and British warplanes.

An inspection mission on Saturday was scrapped after the Iraqis insisted on sending their own helicopters along with United Nations helicopters to the north. From now on, Iraqi officials who accompany inspectors will be permitted on United Nations helicopters.

Mr. Blix said that the Iraqi commitments were largely procedural and that Iraq had still not reached the level of ''pro-active'' cooperation the inspectors are seeking.

''It's a more positive cooperation,'' he said. ''Pro-active would require very active effort on their part to bring forward evidence, documents, interviews.''

The talks were intended to deal only with the day-to-day business of the inspections, which resumed in November under the threat of war from the United States, as well as several specific problems that had cropped up in recent days.

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei continued to say today that the proof of disarmament in 12,000 pages of documents Iraq provided in December was insufficient. As part of today's commitment, Iraq restated a pledge to clarify questions about key areas of concern, including stores of VX nerve gas and reports of imports of uranium and of aluminum tubes for making missiles.

The two sides could not agree, however, on allowing American U-2 spy planes to operate over Iraqi territory, though the inspectors had proposed that the planes be marked as United Nations planes assisting in the inspections.

''It's still a spy plane,'' Mr. Saadi said.
