
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq Pins Hopes on Antiwar Mood at U.N. and in Streets Around the World
By Neil MacFarquhar
Feb. 23, 2003

Iraq appears convinced that its best chance to forestall war, which is likely to come a step closer with the expected introduction within days of a new United Nations resolution authorizing force, lies in cultivating antiwar sentiment both at the Security Council and on the streets of world capitals.

''Clearly the object of the U.S. administration is to adopt a resolution that authorizes military aggression against Iraq,'' Muhammad Mehdi Saleh, the Iraqi trade minister, said at a news conference this week.

''This will meet a very hard position from other countries,'' he said. ''The United States will not have support, due to the fact that those demonstrations took place, even in the United States and Britain.''

Demonstrators from a week ago were still marching across Iraqi television screens last night. In a television interview, Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan suggested that Iraq would do what it could to shore up the antiwar cause by cooperating with the United Nations arms inspectors. Newspaper articles and editorials reported all week in glowing terms that Iraq is winning hearts and minds globally.

''It was referendum day by the people of the world to say no to Bush and his policy and yes to Iraq, to Iraqi rights, Iraqi policies and the Iraqi giant, Mr. President Saddam Hussein,'' said one such article in the official Iraq newspaper days after the demonstrations. Another headline in the paper said: ''Demonstrations Denude the Evil.''

But a range of interlocutors from Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency and a chief weapons inspector, to Baghdad-based diplomats to writers in other Arabic newspapers have been warning the Iraqis not to delude themselves. They emphasize that patience in the Security Council is limited, and that the demonstrators are hardly marching in support of the Iraqi government or of any weapons of mass destruction it may have.

Dr. ElBaradei said today in Tehran that Iraq was still not fully cooperating with the United Nations weapons inspectors, but that war could be avoided.

''We are not getting comprehensive and full cooperation from Iraq, but we hope we will get it in the next few weeks,'' Dr. ElBaradei said at a news conference after a 48-hour visit to Iran. ''We also would like to see active cooperation in freely interviewing Iraqi scientists.''

''We still believe that war is not inevitable,'' he said.

Diplomats and commentators point out that time is slowly evaporating for Iraq to convince its real audience, the United Nations Security Council and its inspectors, who have criticized Iraq for being cooperative on form rather than substance.

''What is critical is further Iraqi cooperation, without such cooperation there are limits to our activities,'' said Yasuhiro Ueki, the spokesman for the inspectors.

Hans Blix, the chief United Nations weapons inspector for biological and chemical weapons, demanded on Friday that by March 1, Iraq destroy its stock of Al Samoud 2 missiles, the casts used to make them and 380 illegally imported engines. The United Nations determined that the missiles exceeded the 93-mile limit imposed on Iraq for short-range missiles by the Persian Gulf war cease-fire agreement.

Weapons inspectors have tagged many of the declared missiles and all of the engines, the spokesman said. They have also sealed the casts, one of the preparatory steps for their destruction. Iraq rebuilt the casts after weapons inspectors destroyed them in the 1990's and used them to build Al Samoud 2 missiles, believed to number between 100 and 120.

There has been no official reaction yet, but the demand leaves Iraq in an acute quandary, especially because the deadline coincides with Mr. Blix's next report on Iraqi compliance to the Security Council. Defy the deadline, and the United States would be likely to get the votes it needs on a new resolution authorizing force. Destroy the missiles, at a time when the country faces invasion, and it could well not be enough.

''It's a catch-22,'' said a Middle Eastern diplomat. ''If Iraq destroyed them, would that solve the problem and prevent war?''

Diplomats here note that from the beginning Iraq's strategy has been to buy time while anticipating that war was probably inevitable. The United States has made very public its reluctance to begin a war later than March, when raging sandstorms and soaring temperatures create a particularly hostile desert environment.

Mr. Blix, in each report to the Security Council, has said that the Iraqis accede on matters concerning inspections but have not answered a series of questions about the fate of chemical weapons, nerve agents, missile systems and other war matériel. These issues were left hanging after the first seven years of inspections were abandoned in 1998. Iraq maintains it has no weapons of mass destruction.

At the United Nations, officials said Mr. Blix's next report would probably emphasize the gaps more than the agreements to make sure Iraq understands the problem. Although the report is to be delivered by March 1, the time needed to translate, distribute and digest it means Mr. Blix will probably address the Council around March 7, said a spokesman, Ewen Buchanan.

The Iraqis have tended to brush criticism aside, but still slowly dole out concessions like the start this past week of U-2 spy plane overflights and a new list of scientists involved in the destruction of biological agents and missiles. Such concessions have allowed proponents of increased inspections like France to argue for more time. The roughly 100 inspectors have carried out 600 visits to 400 sites since they started work on Nov. 27.

But since Mr. Blix's last report to the Security Council on Feb. 14, which was followed a day later by the worldwide antiwar demonstrations, there has been little change in a host of issues listed by the chief weapons inspector as problematic.

From the beginning, for example, the United States has pushed the United Nations inspectors to invoke its right under Security Council Resolution 1441, which resumed the weapons inspections, to interview Iraqi scientists either in private or outside the country. The inspectors from the atomic agency have conducted 12 interviews since December, the first three with Iraqi government officials present and the rest with just tape recorders.

The other inspectors have been stymied, however, with all 31 interview requests refused for scientists involved in biological, chemical or missile technology. The United Nations says the interviews must be in private without tape recorders, but the scientists rejected those conditions. The United Nations believes that the tape recorder might prove intimidating as the tape would be likely to end up in the hands of the Iraqi government.

Immediately after the Feb. 5 presentation at the United Nations by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, Iraq did present three scientists who it said could be interviewed privately. The inspectors have yet to request another interview since Mr. Blix's last report.

Records are another matter of contention. Iraq maintains that the records of the demolition of their weapons were either lost or destroyed. For months, Iraq has been saying that what records were available were included in the 12,000-page report that it submitted to the United Nations on Dec. 7.

Mr. Blix criticized Iraq when more papers concerning nuclear weapons development turned up in a scientist's home and 13 chemical warheads were found.
