
On the East Side-Iraqi Border; Gossip and Suspicion but No Gunfire or Loud Parties
By Marc Santora
Sept. 16, 2002


In the Middle East, Iraq has a reputation as a bad neighbor in a rough neighborhood. Whether gassing Kurds in the north or invading Kuwait to the south, the regime of Saddam Hussein, at the very least, makes its neighbors uncomfortable.

But in a not-so-rough neighborhood, the Upper East Side, residents say Iraq is, in many ways, an ideal neighbor.

The Iraqi Mission to the United Nations, just off Central Park and directly across the street from Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's house on East 79th Street, enjoys the same diplomatic status as an embassy. Because Iraq does not have diplomatic relations with the United States, the Iraqi-interest section in Washington is under the auspices of the Algerians, making Iraq's mission the only sovereign Iraqi territory in the United States.

Residents like having the Iraqis as neighbors, because, they say, the Iraqis keep to themselves, provide occasion for gossip and, with a 24-hour police detail stationed outside, bring added security to the block.

Iraq shares a stoop with children from the Abraham Lincoln School. When classes end, the elementary school students burst out and hop, skip and jump all over Iraq.

''We generally try and keep the kids off that side,'' said Howard Schott, the headmaster at Lincoln, a private school. ''But it's like trying to keep the air in a balloon after it has been busted.''

As he spoke, a little blond girl in a crisp blue jumper and white blouse slipped back and forth through gaps in a wrought-iron fence, bouncing between the Iraqi side and the New York side.

Mr. Schott said no one from the mission had ever complained. ''We have never had any problems,'' he said.

The children's parents say there are benefits in having such an unusual neighbor.

Claudine Westra, whose 3-year-old son, Daniel, attends Lincoln, said the police officer posted outside the mission made her feel secure. ''We also know Bloomberg lives right across the street, and that's comforting,'' she added.

The mayor owns a five-story limestone Beaux-Arts town house -- which he has kept as his residence, instead of moving into Gracie Mansion. When asked what the mayor thinks of his Iraqi neighbors, Edward Skyler, Mr. Bloomberg's spokesman, said, ''The irony isn't lost on him.''

But there is not much fear that the Iraqis will covet the mayor's manse the way they did Kuwait.

Still, just as weapons inspectors would love to know what is going on inside Mr. Hussein's Iraq, neighbors are curious about what is taking place inside New York's Iraq.

''I wonder who's in there and what are they up to,'' said Rob Bennett, who lives down the block. ''I mean, it's the Iraqis!'' However, he did not think there was anything involving local weapons of mass destruction. ''I'm not worried that they are plotting to blow up the block,'' he said.

Mr. Bennett said that the other night he noticed a light on in the mission's basement apartment, which he said was unusual. But when he looked closer, the only thing that concerned him was the choice of décor.

''It looked like they have this old maroon wrap-around sofa straight out of the 1970's,'' he said.

Beyond the gated double doors and inside the mission, the staff of about a dozen is said to be happy with the neighborhood. ''Aside from all the pressure,'' said one staff member, who asked not to be named, referring to current international tensions, ''it is a very nice place to be.''

Outside, passers-by are startled when they notice the small plaque outside that identifies the building as Iraq's Mission to the United Nations. ''I was like, wow! Iraq!'' said Ron Wilkinson, who was visiting from California and had just toured the nearby Metropolitan Museum of Art. He nervously snapped a few quick pictures and then went on his way.

The interior of the mission is not all that surprising -- at least the part a reporter was allowed to glimpse. The entryway was rather spartan. The marble floor in the foyer was polished and gleaming, but the air was slightly musty. There was a wooden reception desk to the right of the staircase. A large poster of Mr. Hussein was on the wall behind the desk. While in Baghdad there would be countless paintings, photographs and statues depicting him in a variety of dress -- from military to Islamic -- in New York, Mr. Hussein is simply wearing a suit, perhaps in a bow to the cosmopolitan city.

Last Thursday, as President Bush stood before the world and called the Hussein government ''a grave and gathering danger,'' the television in the lobby was tuned to Al Jazeera, which was broadcasting the speeches from the United Nations. Even though the weather was mild, a standing fan in the corner of the room blew left and right, lending to the feeling that a visitor was either in a third world country or in Florida.

Outside, a United Parcel Service driver, Johnny Montano, was making his rounds. He said the Iraqis got very normal packages. ''They get a lot of Lands' End,'' he said.

For the most part, neighbors said, the Iraqis keep to themselves.

Workers at neighboring stores on Madison Avenue, including L'Occitane, Robert Marc and Bebe, could not recall anyone from the mission ever shopping there. ''They're private and we're private,'' said Bob Hulsmann, a security guard at the Acquavella art gallery. ''I have spoken to one of their drivers,'' he said. ''He is a really nice guy.''

However, one neighbor, who asked not to be named, was not so enthralled with the Iraqis. ''They never seem to smile,'' she said. ''I know everybody on the block and they are all superfriendly, but the Iraqis have never tried to be neighbors of any sort.''

The Iraqis did cause a stir on the block last year in the days after Sept. 11. Virtually all the flags in the city were lowered to half-staff, except for the Iraqi flag hanging outside the mission. ''Just walking by there was very difficult,'' said another neighbor, who asked not to be named.

A mother of a child at the Abraham Lincoln School said that in the immediate aftermath of the terrorist attacks, she questioned whether unilateral action should be taken against the Iraqi mission. ''I said to one of the police officers outside, 'If you had your kids in a school and these were your neighbors, would you want them here?' ''

But since then, New York's little slice of Iraq has done little to cause a kerfuffle. The mission, opened in the 1950's, has been a part of the landscape for as long as most neighbors can remember.

Mr. Schott, the headmaster, said that he had been watching workers at the mission come and go for more than 20 years. ''They have always been decent, quiet neighbors,'' he said. He said there were no protests outside, like those at other embassies or consulates, and the Iraqis do not throw gala parties that tie up traffic. While parents exploring the possibility of sending their children to the school may inquire about the Iraqis, he said, the children have never asked about them.

However, if war does come, Mr. Schott said, things could get a little tricky. ''Then I have some teaching to do,'' he said.
