

THREATS AND RESPONSES: LONDON; British Dissent Over an Iraq War Imperils Blair's Political Future
By Alan Cowell
March 12, 2003

For weeks and months, a seemingly unruffled Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain has weathered a gathering storm of discontent among members of his Labor Party who are incensed -- or at least unsettled -- by his lock-step alliance with President Bush.

But recently, as Mr. Blair has acknowledged that he might join a war in Iraq without a new authorization from the United Nations, that unease has crystallized into something more ominous.

Now, in by far the worst crisis for Mr. Blair since he took office in 1997, the dissent has given rise to a startlingly open debate about his political future.

''I don't think it is possible to exaggerate the degree of concern about the illegality of what is proposed,'' said Tam Dalyell, a longtime and often maverick legislator from the Labor Party. ''If there is no U.N. mandate and there is not a vote in the Commons before the commitment of British troops, then we ask the prime minister to consider his position as leader of the party.''

The clearest sign of the severity of Mr. Blair's predicament came late Sunday when Clare Short, the influential and often outspoken cabinet minister, blind-sided the prime minister and his followers by threatening to resign if Britain joined the United States in a war in Iraq without a second United Nations Security Council resolution. Not only that, Ms. Short, the international development secretary, called his stewardship in the Iraq crisis ''deeply reckless.''

It is a seeming token of Mr. Blair's current political weakness -- or at least of his desire to avoid the perils of Ms. Short's being cast as a martyr to peace -- that he has responded with public silence, neither castigating nor dismissing her.

Mr. Blair's destiny seems entwined with developments at the Security Council, where France and Russia have threatened to veto Britain's proposals for a new resolution authorizing the use of force in Iraq, and with the nature of any military campaign to oust Saddam Hussein.

In essence, the prime minister is fighting a two-front campaign, one at at the Security Council and the other at home.

''If there's no second resolution and the war is anything other than short, sharp and bloodless, he'll be in serious trouble,'' said Charles Grant of the Center for European Reform, an independent policy organization.

The latest opinion survey suggests growing disillusion with the allies' justification for war. The survey, published in The Times of London, said 62 percent of respondents did not believe that Britain and the United States had put forward a convincing case for war, compared with 57 percent a month ago. There appears to be a growing sense here that the weapons inspections are forcing Mr. Hussein to disarm, however falteringly, and should be given more time.

The survey showed that antiwar sentiment was building among Labor voters, while followers of the opposition Conservative Party had become more supportive of a war.

Other surveys suggest that a second United Nations resolution would swing public opinion behind Mr. Blair, giving developments at the Security Council with potentially more political consequences for Mr. Blair than they seem to portend for the White House.

The political crisis here has profound implications for Mr. Bush's ''coalition of the willing,'' apparently raising doubts among some senior American officials about the likely impact of Labor Party dissent on Britain's ability to fight.

While Mr. Blair has given no indication that his resolve is weakening, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld seemed to hint today that Washington might even contemplate an initial campaign without Britain.

''What will ultimately be decided is unclear as to their role -- that is to say, their role in the event that a decision is made to use force,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said of the British, who have committed some 40,000 troops to join the 200,000-plus Americans in the Persian Gulf region.

Mr. Rumsfeld later modified those remarks, saying he had ''no doubt'' about Britain's ''full support'' in the effort to disarm Iraq.

Mr. Blair had earlier castigated France and Russia for their readiness to ease the pressure on Mr. Hussein by rejecting a new United Nations authorization to invade Iraq.

''The only reason we made any progress at all in the past few weeks has been because of the threat of force,'' the prime minister said today after meeting here with the Portuguese prime minister, José Manuel Durão Barroso. ''And my concern is that if countries talk about using a veto in all sets of circumstances, the message that sends to Saddam Hussein is, 'You are off the hook.' ''

Mr. Blair has sent a senior foreign office official, Baroness Amos, to the impoverished African countries of Cameroon, Angola and Guinea, which are current members of the Security Council. That trip follows that of the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin. Both envoys have sought to swing the undecided African nations in their favor.

''In going to war without the sanction of the United Nations, we will see the prospects for another fine Labor government disappear,'' said Hilton Dawson, a legislator who was one of 122 Laborites to challenge Mr. Blair in Parliament last month on the need to go to war. ''We will see the distinct possibility of this Labor Party being brought to its knees.''

John McDonnell, another Labor rebel, declared, ''We are asking Tony Blair to consider his position.''

That same discontent has been drummed home to Mr. Blair in televised meetings in the last week with audiences as disparate as young rock fans in an MTV studio to women in a television debate on Monday night. Some of the women were mothers of people who died in the attacks on New York on Sept. 11, 2001, or in the first Persian Gulf war a decade earlier. Some harangued Mr. Blair. Many urged him not to go to war.

The misgivings have been echoed by student leaders as well as a former Labor defense minister, Denis Healey, who said Mr. Blair's unequivocal support for Washington was ''a disastrous error.''

Mr. Blair stands accused of losing touch with the traditional, pacifist grass roots of the Labor Party, but draws strong backing from the Conservatives. The impact on parliamentary arithmetic is clear and not necessarily threatening to Mr. Blair. Even if more than 120 Labor legislators vote to oppose him, as happened last month, he can still count on the support of most of the 165 Conservatives. In addition, Labor has a huge majority, with 411 of the 659 seats. But if Mr. Blair was seen to be depending on the Conservatives for his political survival while his own party revolts, his position could be weakened still further.

The Labor Party's mainstream heavyweights have moved to squelch rebellious talk.

John Reid, the party chairman, today dismissed the mavericks like Mr. Dalyell as ''the usual suspects.'' On Monday, Gordon Brown, the chancellor of the exchequer, who is often depicted as the person most likely to succeed Mr. Blair, declared that ''the whole country should support Tony Blair in his determination to secure international agreement for a second resolution.''

That was significant, said Mr. Grant at the Center for European Reform. ''The only person who matters is Gordon Brown, and he was being very supportive,'' he said.
