

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PERSPECTIVES -- In Senate, a Call for Answers And a Warning on the Future; Focus on Iraq Criticized
By Carl Hulse
Sept. 10, 2002


Senator Bob Graham, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, calls the Bush administration's focus on Iraq a distraction from the campaign against terrorism and lists Syria and Iran as countries that should be the first targets of any aggressive effort against state sponsors of terrorist activity.

In an interview reflecting on Sept. 11 and its consequences, Mr. Graham, a Florida Democrat, also said he feared that the United States was becoming ''bogged down'' in an unproductive manhunt in Afghanistan and that the nation needed an ''aggressive war plan'' to strike at terrorist organizations.

''Victory is going to be won on the offensive, going to where the terrorists are and aggressively taking them on,'' Mr. Graham said. The senator said Iraq should not be the priority, given President Bush's own criteria: countries that were accomplices in the Sept. 11 attacks or that provided a sanctuary for terrorist groups.

''By those two standards, Iraq does not make it very high on the list of a terrorist state,'' Mr. Graham said.

He said the antiterrorism effort should focus on countries that had a significant Qaeda presence or terrorist training camps. ''Those are primarily in Syria, in the Syrian-controlled areas of Lebanon and in Iran,'' the senator said.

He added a warning: ''Avoid the allure of distractions. At this point, I think Iraq is a primary distraction from achieving our goals or reducing the threat of international terrorism.''

Mr. Graham, a longtime member of the Intelligence Committee that he now heads, was among the Americans who were not totally surprised by the attacks last year.

''September the 11th confirmed what many had been saying before that date and that is that in the post-cold-war era that terrorism was going to be our major security threat,'' said Mr. Graham, in his Senate office filled with colorful Florida landscapes.

Only a few days before the hijacked planes flew into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, Mr. Graham had been on an intelligence assessment mission in Pakistan. He recalled learning of the attacks when he was back in Washington having breakfast with a top Pakistani intelligence official, talking about ''the capabilities and the intentions of the Taliban and Al Qaeda.''

But even the senator, privy to the top secrets of the intelligence community as the veteran of dozens of confidential briefings, said he was not prepared for the dimensions of the attacks.

''The fact that something like Sept. 11 occurred and that it occurred in the United States was not a stunning development,'' Mr. Graham said. ''The fact that we were vulnerable to this had been anticipated. The actual details, the sophistication and the carnage, the loss of life that occurred were stunning.''

Mr. Graham said there had been no briefing or analysis that gave a hint of the type of attack ultimately carried out by members of Al Qaeda. Now he and other members of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees are trying to determine if there should have been.

Since the spring, the two panels have been conducting a confidential inquiry into whether the intelligence community failed the nation in the months before the terrorist attack and what changes need to be instituted. Some of the secret information under examination has already become public, enraging administration officials, who said the disclosures could hobble antiterror efforts. Mr. Graham and others leading the inquiry called for a Federal Bureau of Investigation inquiry of the panel and its staff.

The disclosures said the National Security Agency had intercepted two cryptic communications on Sept. 10 referring to a major event to take place the next day.

Mr. Graham also said the inquiry by the intelligence committees had found evidence that information was available that might have prevented the attacks, had there been better coordination among intelligence agencies.

Panel members, whose deliberate pace has come under criticism from some committee members and people outside the committee, are expected to convene their first public hearings next week and conduct them twice weekly until Congress adjourns in October.

Mr. Graham said he did not want to get ahead of his own inquiry in making a final determination about any intelligence lapses. But in his comments he made clear that he believed that signals were missed.

''We had significant blocks of information,'' he said, ''but those blocks never got before a single set of eyes who could analyze them and put them together and see the pattern that was emerging from those individual blocks.''

Looking ahead, the senator said a chief concern was that Americans would become complacent again as security improves.

''In important areas we are more secure than we were a year ago,'' he said, singling out air travel and threats from bioterrorism. But he said that more work needed to be done on securing the nation's ports, among other areas, and that the United States must not ''fall into the trap of waiting until a vulnerability has actually been assaulted before we start to harden against that assault.''

Even while he pushed for more resources to protect the nation, Mr. Graham warned that aggressive offensive measures were also necessary, saying, ''Victory in the war on terrorism will not be won on the defensive, by building castles around our vulnerabilities.''

Mr. Graham said he believed future generations would still face a threat of terrorism -- ''hopefully a diminished threat.'' He said a concerted international effort to wipe out terrorism, which he compared to the post-World War II-push against organized crime, could bring results.

''Over the next generation or two you might see a diminution of their influence,'' he said of international terrorists.

Mr. Graham said the nation's intelligence apparatus was going to have to change, shifting to traditional methods from a heavy reliance on technology and satellites.

''In this war on terrorism, it is going to be back to the old human factor,'' said Mr. Graham, who said the nation's intelligence gathering had improved already. ''We are going to have spies, either those that are our direct agents or people that we have hired for a particular job who can get inside these international terrorist organizations, find out what they are planning to do and give us enough lead time that other law enforcement and even military units can disrupt the terrorists before they can strike.''

A Senator Being Eyed for a National Ticket

EARLY YEARS: Born in Coral Gables, Fla., on Nov. 9, 1936; Miami Senior High School, 1955; B.S., University of Florida, 1959; LL.B., Harvard Law School, 1962.

PUBLIC CAREER: Florida state representative 1967-70; Florida state senator 1971-78; governor of Florida 1979-86; United States senator 1987-present.

PRIVATE SECTOR CAREER: Builder and rancher.

POLITICAL DOSSIER: Used a campaign of ''work days'' -- doing ordinary jobs for a day -- to vault from state lawmaker to governor. Hugely popular at home; enjoys the campaign trail. Now battling Gov. Jeb Bush over the governance of higher education in the state.

STYLE: Always wears ties with an outline of the state of Florida. Serious student of policy who seeks legislative solutions. Doesn't take chances.

QUOTE: ''Victory in the war on terrorism will not be won on the defensive, by building castles around our vulnerabilities.''

HIS FUTURE: Has been eyed for a national ticket; his prominence and Florida's importance make him a continued prospect for consideration.
