

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUSSEIN'S FOES; Iraqi Kurds Fight a War That Has Two Faces
By C. J. Chivers
Jan. 15, 2003

Sometime in the early hours of darkness, the mortar firing resumed. A few booms reverberated from enemy lines. Then the wait, to hear where the shells would land.

''Not here,'' said Halat Karim Agha, commander of a group of soldiers in the snow on one of this mountain's triplet peaks. ''Down there, in the valley. By the villages again.''

His soldiers, known as pesh merga, meaning ''those who face death,'' sat quietly under the moon.

Eighteen pesh merga live here, atop a peak rising more than a mile in the sky, in seven stone bunkers that would fit inside a circle 45 feet wide. It is one spot on a front descending from Shinerwe Mountain to the valley's floor, pitting the pesh merga against the Islamic fighters of Ansar al Islam, a group connected to Al Qaeda.

Halat Karim Agha, 32, is the son of Karim Agha, 75, who lives along northern Iraq's other front, 85 miles away, which separates Kurdish-controlled Iraq from territory ruled by Saddam Hussein.

There are two wars in northern Iraq, the small, active one here along the border with Iran, and the mostly dormant one to the south and west, which Kurds expect to resume soon, if the United States tries to dislodge Mr. Hussein.

The Aghas, father and son, tribal elder and tribal warrior, have a window on both. They are the latest incarnations of the Hamawand tribe, a Kurdish bloodline that never seems to miss a fight.

In Ottoman times, the Hamawands were famously recalcitrant, refusing to pay taxes to Turks or to serve in their army, and demanding a say in local affairs. This independent streak did not go unpunished. They were expelled from the region in the 1870's, exiled to North Africa.

The expulsions were intended to end resistance. For a while, they did. But within 20 years, the Hamawands walked back, eastward across Africa to Egypt, then northward through the Middle East, returning to their villages and another century of strife.

Their descendants are still here, and still carrying guns. It is a legend with a lesson: We will not submit.

Of the 18 soldiers crouched among these rocks, 12 were Hamawands. One, Azad Abuzaid Mohammadkhak, 23, sat statue-still for hours.

''I consider all of these fighters to be my relatives,'' he said, a statement needing no more elaboration than the rocket by his side.

Early last month Ansar struck two other garrisons before dawn, and caught a pesh merga unit asleep. The captured pesh merga were executed. Since that raid the pesh merga have been on alert, sitting at their guns from dusk until the sun climbs again in the sky above Iran.

At this great height, in the winter, the weather is often severe. But not this night, when the air was so still that a struck match would burn down to a man's hand. Above the pesh merga was the stripe of the Milky Way. Beneath them, a twinkle rose from lights in Ansar-held villages.

Halat Karim Agha paced the circle's center, and said he was expecting American help against both his current foes.

''We used to believe the mountains were our only friends,'' he said. ''Now we have the strongest friend in the world.''

Still, the Hamawand resort to guerrilla tricks, stacking rocks on the parapet in shapes resembling a man's shoulders and head, each looking like a pesh merga on watch. It is done to make Ansar think there are more than 18 men in these bunkers, in hopes their marksman will waste their aim.

Halat Karim Agha entered a bunker for tea. The flicker of a kerosene lamp illuminated a space crammed with soldiers' things: a small mirror, a shortwave radio, a week-old party newspaper, a half-empty pack of crumbly cigarettes.

He kneaded a circular scar on his forearm. He has been shot or struck by shrapnel four times since 1991.

Everyone older than 30 seems to have a reset bone or jagged scar. In a bunkhouse lower on the mountain, where Halat Karim Agha's commander supervises the front, the commander is the only man who does not sit cross-legged, Kurdish style. He cannot, having been shot through the femur by a machine-gun bullet in 1996.

When one man was asked if he had been spared, he pulled down his bottom lip and removed a plate of artificial teeth.

''Bullet,'' he said. ''In the mouth.''

Hamawand hospitality, like Hamawand resolve, is the stuff of tribal pride. When two visitors came to Karim Agha's house in Chamchamal on a recent afternoon, he slaughtered a sheep and two turkeys, and served them with soup and seasoned rice.

On that day, Halat was on leave. The tribal warrior served food while the tribal elder spoke. This was the other front, where the Agha home sits within sight of the Iraqi I Corps, a unit of several thousand soldiers loyal to Saddam Hussein.

Karim Agha pointed uphill, toward President Hussein's troops. ''It is not the number of soldiers that is important,'' he said. ''It is the type that is important. The type they have here are fake soldiers. If there is a war, they will not fire a shot.''

Those Iraqi soldiers are conscripts, he said, and are hungry and scared. Smugglers report that the units are so poorly equipped that colonels travel in taxis, not military cars. Imagine the indignity, Karim Agha said.

He sipped his tea and stared at the bunkers on the brown slope. ''The women of this town could take that hill,'' he said.

It is not so at the lines that face the Ansar fighters. Here there is fear, and hatred.

After seizing Shinerwe Mountain in 2001, Halat Karim Agha's pesh merga hauled dead Islamists down the trail to a mosque in Halabja -- as custom and decency dictate -- where local families claimed them for burial.

In two days the remains of local militants were gone, but seven bodies remained unclaimed. They were foreigners, jihad fighters from somewhere else.

''We didn't know who they were,'' he said. ''They had big beards, and they were ugly and strange.''

The Kurds believe they were members of Al Qaeda or Taliban fugitives from Afghanistan, and blame them for encouraging the mutilations of pesh merga dead: the slicing off of ears, the chopping off of heads.

He thinks the foreigners will never surrender. ''Those who have their hands red in the blood of people cannot find a place in society,'' he said. ''They themselves would not choose it.''

When the moon set, the sky dropped close enough that it seemed a man could run fingers through the stars. At last, when the horizon paled again, Halat Karim Agha emerged from the bunker, stepping into the gathering day. He squinted. His cousin was there, bathed in the orange glow, looking longingly at the shimmering ball.

Another night behind them. Now, the sun, and a chance for sleep.

''We've become like bats,'' said his cousin, Sabir Sulaiman Fatah. ''Our eyes do not know the light.''
Correction: Jan. 16, 2003
A picture yesterday with an article about conflicts in northern Iraq misidentified a tribal fighter who was seen unbuckling his cartridge belt. He was unidentified; Gilda Drozna was a town's name, not his.
