
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE OVERVIEW; RIFT SEEN AT U.N. OVER NEXT STEPS TO DEAL WITH IRAQ
By Julia Preston
Sept. 18, 2002


The United States insisted here today on keeping up the pressure on Iraq with a tough new Security Council resolution, while Russia, France, China and the Arab nations said Iraq's decision to allow the return of international weapons inspectors was enough to hold off stronger action for the time being.

The very visible rift here exposed core differences between the United States and other major countries at the United Nations, which contended that the weapons inspectors should be given time to determine whether Iraq is producing prohibited weapons. The Bush administration had little faith that inspections would ensure Iraq's disarmament and pressed ahead for a Security Council measure that could authorize an eventual military attack against the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein.

''It's time for us to secure the peace,'' President Bush said today in Nashville. ''The United Nations must act. It's time to determine if they will be a force for peace or an ineffective debating society.''

In the first move toward gearing up the arms inspections again, senior Iraqi officials held brief discussions today with Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations inspection team, to begin arranging logistics for its work. But no conclusions were reached, and the two sides agreed that they would complete the practical planning at a meeting in Vienna during the week of Sept. 30.

Bush administration officials said they would try to hold up the inspectors' travel to Iraq until the Security Council passes a resolution that would impose detailed new conditions on their work, making it harder for President Hussein to stall and deceive them, as he has in the past.

The officials reaffirmed their plans today to have specific draft language on those new requirements to propose to other Council members by the end of this week. But it was clear that Iraq's move had slowed the momentum of the United States' campaign to treat Mr. Hussein as an international outlaw who had to be dealt with by force.

Mr. Bush, without referring directly to a letter from Iraq to Secretary General Kofi Annan on Monday announcing that the inspectors could return, today repeated his challenge to the United Nations, saying this was the moment to prove that it was a ''relevant'' organization.

The contrasting views here crackled to the surface at a midday news conference where Secretary of State Colin L. Powell insisted that the Security Council should act, even before the inspectors reach Iraq, to lay out ''a different road than what we have seen in the past'' for Iraq's disarmament, ''with tough conditions, tough standards.''

Sitting on the dais with Secretary Powell, Russia's foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, quickly countered that no new arms resolution was needed. Mr. Annan, wedged between the two in the diplomatic tableau, appealed for ''unison and union'' on the Security Council.

The Arab League, which played a key role in bringing Iraq around to accept the inspectors, today explicitly called on the Bush administration to ''refrain from the threat of use of force against Iraq'' and insisted on respect for Iraq's sovereignty.

American officials will insist on a new resolution that includes a timetable for compliance and a threat of military force if Iraq does not meet the terms of the Council measure, leaving the United States a margin of maneuver on if and how to strike.

American officials appeared frustrated that the letter from Iraq on Monday provided for the return of the inspectors ''without conditions'' but included no language guaranteeing cooperation with the inspections.

Mr. Annan advised the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, on the wording of the letter, United Nations diplomats said. The United States had hoped that Mr. Annan would not agree to Iraq's offer without more explicit terms that would allow the inspectors to work unobstructed.

''We've seen this game before,'' Secretary Powell said, speaking of Iraq's many maneuvers in the past to foil the weapons inspections.

He said there were ''shortcomings in the previous inspection regime that I don't think would be acceptable in any future inspection regime.''

Mr. Ivanov came right back, to say that Russia favors the inspectors' ''getting down to business,'' and that previous Council resolutions are adequate to guide their work. But he did not rule out a new resolution to address other issues where Iraq is out of compliance with Council demands.

American officials said Mr. Bush planned to talk by telephone in coming days with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to urge him to support the new resolution.

Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin of France, another permanent Council member. said late Monday that France also feels that existing resolutions cover the ground. But today he remained silent, deferring to the European Union, which was much more skeptical.

''It's good, but we must be sure it is good enough,'' Per Stig Moller, the foreign minister of Denmark, which now holds the presidency of the union, said of the Iraqi letter. He urged the Council to insist that Iraq cooperate fully with the inspections.

The only action the Council agreed on today was to schedule a briefing by Mr. Blix, perhaps as early as Wednesday, on his plans for reactivating inspections. The inspectors withdrew from Iraq in December 1998 on the eve of bombing by the United States and Britain, and Baghdad did not allow them to return.

Mr. Blix's one-hour meeting today was with Gen. Hossam Amin, the Iraqi officer who directs the government office that coordinates the inspections, and Saeed Hasan, a former ambassador to the United Nations. Mr. Blix announced afterward that Iraq had agreed to provide, at the Vienna meeting, the four-year backlog of documents reporting its ''dual use'' imports, purchases of legal materials that could be used for developing chemical, biological or nuclear weapons. There is still no date for the inspectors to return to Iraq.

Mr. Hasan said Iraq was allowing inspections to resume to comply with United Nations demands so that economic sanctions would be lifted.

In Washington, American officials continued to prepare for possible military action. Vice President Dick Cheney lobbied Congress to act quickly on a resolution authorizing force against Iraq, and the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, predicted a vote ''well before the election.''

Aboard Air Force One, Mr. Bush's press secretary, Ari Fleischer, said: ''Now is not the time to take off the pressure on Iraq. The president thinks that now is even more so the time for the United Nations and the Congress to act, so that Saddam Hussein will know that the world is serious and that the Congress is serious.''

Mr. Fleischer, said that history ''has shown that Saddam Hussein's word cannot be taken at face value,'' adding, ''He has a history of playing rope-a-dope with the world, all the while he develops a more powerful punch.''

The dispute over Iraq completely eclipsed a meeting today on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict held by the group called the Quartet, including Secretary Powell, Mr. Ivanov, Mr. Moller and Mr. Annan.

A communiqué after the meeting made it clear that the group had broadly endorsed the Bush administration's plan for a settlement in the Middle East, including its proposal for the creation of a Palestinian state within provisional boundaries next year.
