

Congress Returning to Take Up Domestic Security Plan and Iraq
By Carl Hulse
Sept. 3, 2002


Fast approaching elections that will determine control of the House and Senate, Congress returns here on Tuesday to try to resolve a division over the shape of a new Homeland Security Department and confront an issue that has intensified in the month that lawmakers have been away: Iraq.

Republicans and Democrats alike say they expect to devote considerable attention to the possibility of conflict with Iraq, through hearings, more talks with the White House and, perhaps, even a vote on authorizing an effort to overthrow Saddam Hussein's government.

Iraq is a focus of attention as lawmakers have scheduled five weeks to finish legislative business before departing to campaign for the Nov. 5 elections, although virtually no one expects that Oct. 4 deadline to be met.

Besides a contentious debate over the Homeland Security Department, the House and Senate still have to adopt all 13 annual spending bills. Lawmakers see approval of new rules to protect pension and an energy plan as other priorities. Influential members are also holding out hope for movement on drug coverage for older Americans, a patients' bill of rights, an increase in the minimum wage and other domestic issues.

''We've got more to do than we've got time to do it in, I guarantee you,'' said Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana.

President Bush sought to prod lawmakers today in a Labor Day speech to a union picnic outside Pittsburgh, saying, ''Congress needs to get moving'' on terrorism insurance and his legislative priorities.

Many people on Capitol Hill are talking about the prospects for a ''lame-duck'' session after the elections to clear unfinished business. The current session is widely expected to extend at least a week or two beyond the adjournment target.

Both parties will be doing their best to move to the forefront those issues they hope will give their candidates an advantage on Election Day. The picture remains unsettled because the fight for majorities is tight in both the House and the Senate.

The observance of the anniversary of the terrorist attacks will also absorb time and attention. Scores of lawmakers plan to travel to New York on Friday for a mainly ceremonial joint meeting of Congress and the laying of a wreath at ground zero.

In the Republican-led House, a spokesman for Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois said legislative progress would depend on what the Democratic-led Senate can move forward.

''Obviously,'' the spokesman, John Feehery, said, ''we are waiting for a lot of production from the Senate.''

Mr. Feehery noted that House members had approved a domestic security bill, a proposal on drug coverage, pension protection and welfare changes, among other measures.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Health, Education and Labor Committee, said that he would continue to press for consideration of domestic issues and that Congress could not let itself be consumed by Iraq.

''This is a very important issue,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''But we can't let it replace the domestic agenda whether it is by purpose or design. We cannot let these issues go by the wayside.''

The Senate will begin with a difficult fight over the domestic security agency. The floor debate could take weeks, lawmakers and aides say. The House and Senate would then have to resolve the differences in their bills.

When the department was first proposed, Congressional leaders had hoped to have a bill ready for Mr. Bush to sign by Sept. 11. A main sticking point is the administration's call for expanded authority over hiring, firing and paying employees moved into the new agency.

Mr. Bush, who is to begin meeting on Tuesday with senators at the White House to press his legislative goals, has indicated strong opposition to any bill for a department that does not give him the personnel power he says he needs to respond to terrorist threats.

''And the Senate better get it right,'' he said today.

Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the Connecticut Democrat who is a chief author of the Senate proposal, said that the Senate plan gave the president most of what he wanted and that Mr. Bush was placing undue emphasis on the workplace issues, jeopardizing the entire proposal.

In a letter to colleagues last week, Mr. Lieberman said the president risked dragging the measure ''into unnecessary controversy by tacking on significant but vague new executive powers that are uncalled for and, in some cases, unprecedented.''

Other senators, including Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, have expressed reservations about the rapid pace of establishing such a large department that merges more than 20 agencies with 170,000 employees.

The House, which returns on Wednesday, will devote much attention to considering the 13 spending measures, none of which have passed Congress despite a deadline of Oct. 1. Though the House and Senate have both adopted military bills, many other agencies may ultimately be financed by temporary measures while wide differences on spending are worked out.

House conservatives won a promise in July that the huge spending bill for labor and health issues will be first on the floor this month, and that is a perennial battle. The House may also take up some tax breaks for education and investment losses.

Mr. Hastert's aide, Mr. Feehery, said he anticipated that Iraq would come before the House, ''though I don't know what form it will take.''

''That has been dominating the discussion all during August,'' Mr. Feehery said, ''and that is what a lot of people will be talking about.''

Even Democrats say Mr. Bush could probably win a vote in favor of action against Iraq, but only if he more clearly articulated his reasons.

''He has to lay out enough evidence that convinces enough people that if we don't take out Saddam now, he is going to have nuclear weapons in a year or so,'' said Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of Manhattan.

Given the focus on corporate wrongdoing, Congressional leaders say they expect to be able to agree on new pension regulations. The House approved a measure in April that its authors said would help safeguard 401(k) retirement plans after the Enron scandal.

The Senate Democratic leadership is developing a proposal that it says would go further. Aides to the majority leader, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said pension changes would be the second item of Senate business after domestic security.

Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Breaux said they would like to take another stab at subsidizing outpatient drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries, a proposal that fell short in the Senate just before adjournment. The two senators said that staff members had been working on a compromise over the recess and that it could breathe life back into the initiative, particularly if lawmakers had heard from unhappy older Americans over the recess.

Also in the wings for consideration are changes in the election system prompted by the presidential election in 2000, terrorism insurance, an overhaul of the bankruptcy law, judicial and executive branch nominations, aid to religion-based groups and seaport security, all sufficient to keep Congress in session as the election draws closer.

Some officials cautioned members to keep travel plans flexible.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Daschle, Molly Rowley, said, ''Don't buy any nonrefundable tickets for Oct. 5.''
