

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE REFUGEES; Uprooted Iraqis See War as Path To Lost Homes
By C. J. Chivers
Dec. 5, 2002


One element of the misery caused by President Saddam Hussein's rule was evident on Tuesday evening, when a wealthy Kurdish man donated meat to this encampment of people Mr. Hussein has forced from their homes.

Using a rickety balance scale, 73 families divided the meat into 73 portions. It worked out to a few ounces per tent, a bite or two per person for the coming Islamic festival of Id al-Fitr.

''Animals live better than us,'' said Farhod Muhammad Karim, who lives with his seven children in something akin to a mud-brick box. ''I want to go home.''

Mr. Karim and his children represent a drop in a human tide, held back now by the enduring power of Mr. Hussein, but ready to burst out. These days he paces the chill and squalor of Barda Qaraman, but his real home is in Kirkuk, on the other side of the front lines dividing Iraq into north and south. He plans to head back.

During decades of dictatorial rule, as many as a million people have been relocated inside Iraq, aid organizations say. In tours this week of Barda Qaraman and two other camps where displaced people live, the most consistent voice was the people's collective pledge to return to their former residences in the aftermath of a war they await.

Much of the political preparation for war within Iraq has involved diplomatic efforts to keep opposition parties and their fighters in check, and to keep them from seizing important cities.

But there is another possibility: that popular sentiment will release forces independent of military plans and that if a time comes when the Iraqi Army appears defeated, untold thousands of people will take to the roads in spontaneous migrations to reclaim businesses and homes.

''Iraq has been a giant social engineering project,'' said Peter Bouckaert, a researcher for Human Rights Watch who recently surveyed the Kurdish camps. ''People have been moved around and bused around all over the country, in a serial displacement, and when they start going home they are going to displace other people. There is going to be a domino effect.''

Mr. Bouckaert said there had been little preparation for what might follow, and the possibilities are worrisome. ''What creates an explosive situation is when abused people go home and find other people in their homes,'' he said. ''That is a very difficult situation to control.''

The internal refugees scattered through Iraq are a result of varied efforts by Mr. Hussein and his Arab Baath Socialist Party to dominate his nation.

Some relocation programs have aimed to create Arab majorities near oil fields, to secure control of economic assets. Others have been devised to subdue insurgencies or political opposition. Kurds say the often savage uprootings of villages also spring from a deep racist streak in Mr. Hussein and his confidants, who regard the nation's Shiite Muslims, Turkmen, Kurds and Assyrian Christians as inferior to the ruling class of Sunni Muslim Arabs.

Whatever their rationale, the policies have had similar effects. Through forcible expulsion or leverage gained by stripping families of identities, property documents and food ration cards, the central government has sent huge sections of its citizenry into destitution and camps. Barda Qaraman, a squalid settlement of about 450 Kurds, is a destination for victims of all types.

Mr. Karim said Baath officials had told him to ''correct'' his ethnicity on a government form, declaring that he was an Arab who had mistakenly been living as a Kurd. He refused and was expelled. ''Either you change your identity to an Arab or you have to leave,'' he said.

Hikmat Muhammad, 45, said he had been expelled after he would not provide Iraqi intelligence agents information about his neighbors.

Muhammad Karim Aziz, 60, said the Baath party had forced him from his home after two of his sons had joined the pesh merga, the guerrilla fighters who harass Iraq's army. ''They gave me a choice: either call your sons home or leave,'' he said. ''If I called back my sons, they would have killed them.''

Talib Muhammad Said, 57, is the newest arrival, having walked into camp last month with his four children after his oldest son, Sherzad, left Abu Ghraib prison in a wide-scale release of inmates.

The party called the release an amnesty and said his son was free. Rejoicing at Sherzad's return was cut short when security officers arrived at his father's house. ''They said: 'Your son has been in prison. You are a bad family. You have to leave,' '' Mr. Said recalled.

Having no tent, the family huddled in a room in an abandoned school.

None of these people expressed any interest in violence, and Kurdish officials, noting that, said chaos was not inevitable in case of war.

Barham Salih, prime minister of the eastern side of the Kurdish enclave, said he thought Kurds would not slip into retaliation, in part because many Arabs who had occupied Kurdish homes would leave before Kurds returned, but also because the nation was weary of bloodletting, and of policies that pit Iraqis against each other. ''We want Kirkuk to be a place, a monument, to the failure of ethnic cleansing in the world,'' Mr. Salih said.

But he also said that the force of popular will could be irresistible. ''We will not, and in my opinion no one can, prevent people from seeking their properties and their homes,'' he said.

Kirkuk is but one example, because displacement is not isolated to Iraq's northern zone. Aid organizations say Kurds have been also bused to southern provinces. The government has also drained waterways along the southern part of the Iranian border, where so-called marsh Arabs have lived for 5,000 years, and largely scattered the population. Turkmen, Assyrians and Shiite Muslims have been victims as well.

How many people are displaced remains unknown. A report in October by the Brookings Institution noted that the best estimates suggest that 500,000 to 800,000 displaced people live in the north, and 300,000 in areas under the control of Mr. Hussein's government.

It is similarly impossible to know how many of those people will try to return to their homes. But if interviews in camps are a guide, sentiments were nearly unanimous.

In the nearby Takia camp, Neimat Sadiq Muhammad, 46, who was forced out of Kirkuk six months ago after her sons deserted the Iraqi Army, was counting the days for Mr. Hussein to fall. ''We will walk, we will run, we will jog, all the way back to our houses,'' she said. ''As soon as there is no danger, we will leave this place.''

Even in the newly built Sapareen housing complex -- a United Nations project where homes are modern in every way, with plumbing, glass windows, a septic system, steel doors and a walled front yard -- there was an ache for something else.

Samad Jabar moved his family in 11 days ago. Though he has a job in nearby Sulaimaniya, and now a respectable home, he said he would leave as soon as he could. ''It is true that this is nice,'' he said. ''But only your real home is beautiful. This is not my real home.''
