

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT; 'NOT ENCOURAGING,' BUSH SAYS OF IRAQ ON ARMS DEMANDS
By David E. Sanger and Richard W. Stevenson
Dec. 3, 2002


President Bush demanded today that Saddam Hussein include every detail of Iraq's weapons and missile programs in a declaration due at the United Nations on Sunday, and said his initial reading of Mr. Hussein's cooperation was ''not encouraging.''

''Any act of delay, deception or defiance will prove that Saddam Hussein has not accepted the path of compliance and has rejected the path of peace,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech at the Pentagon, where he signed a defense budget authorization bill.

Only a week after United Nations weapons inspectors began searching for evidence of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons in Iraq, Mr. Bush appeared to be setting up the Sunday deadline as a crucial measure of Iraqi cooperation.

He stopped short of declaring that an incomplete declaration on Sunday would constitute a cause for war, and several officials said the Pentagon was not yet ready to fight in Iraq. But he did say the report would amount to a clear test of whether Mr. Hussein has changed his ways.

A senior administration official said tonight that the White House did not know what to expect from the Dec. 8 declaration that Iraq is required to make. But the official said that because it would most likely be a long document -- perhaps hundreds of pages -- ''the more important date'' would occur when officials had completed their assessment of it.

In its discussions at the United Nations, the administration has held back whatever intelligence it has collected about Iraq's activities, hoping to leave Mr. Hussein guessing how much the United States knows. It is possible that Mr. Bush will decide to offer up evidence that contradicts the Iraqi declaration or points out major omissions.

''The drama here may be how much we are willing to reveal,'' said a senior official with access to the intelligence. Other officials say, however, that the inspections are unlikely to succeed unless there are defections by Iraqi scientists who have knowledge of where weapons or development laboratories are hidden.

Mr. Bush's speech -- together with a similar one delivered today by Vice President Dick Cheney in Denver -- marked the opening of a White House campaign to shift public attention from what the inspectors may or may not find to the United Nations' demand that Mr. Hussein come clean about his weapons programs.

In what appeared a closely coordinated effort to build the case, Britain today released a 23-page report accusing the Iraqi leader of rights abuses including systematic torture, mass executions and the use of rape as a weapon against political opponents or their families.

When Mr. Bush spoke today in the Pentagon auditorium, with Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at his side, he apparently did not know that inspectors in Iraq had found equipment missing from an Iraqi missile plant. But the president said the goal of the inspections was not to uncover weapons but to ensure that Mr. Hussein complied with international demands to get rid of them.

''You see, the inspectors are not in Iraq to play hide-and-seek with Mr. Saddam Hussein,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Inspectors do not have the duty or the ability to uncover terrible weapons hidden in a vast country. The responsibility of inspectors is simply to confirm the evidence of voluntary and total disarmament.''

He made clear his skepticism that Iraq would live up to the United Nations resolution.

''In the inspections process, the United States will be making one judgment: Has Saddam Hussein changed his behavior of the last 11 years? Has he decided to cooperate willingly and comply completely, or has he not?'' the president said. ''So far the signs are not encouraging.''

As one such sign, Mr. Bush cited persistent Iraqi attacks on American and British warplanes in the no-flight zones over Iraq -- confrontations that the United States, though few other nations, regards as a ''material breach'' of the United Nations resolution requiring Iraq's full cooperation in inspections and disarmament.

He said Iraq had also undermined its case by sending the United Nations letters ''filled with protests and falsehoods.''

Underscoring the administration's hard line, Mr. Cheney declared in his speech that ''this time, deception will not be tolerated.'' It was he who argued, in a speech in August, that inspections would be useless, and perhaps dangerous, because they could create a false sense of comfort about Iraq's weapons capabilities. But in one of the rare public moments in the internal administration struggle over how to pursue Mr. Hussein, Mr. Cheney had to remove that statement from later speeches. The White House has since insisted that it supports the inspections, but only as a means to an end: disarmament.

Today, the vice president again held out the possibility that the Iraqi government could have or could develop ties to Al Qaeda, despite skepticism among some of the administration's critics about such a link.

''That is why confronting the threat posed by Iraq is not a distraction from the war on terror,'' Mr. Cheney said in a speech to the Air National Guard Leadership Conference. ''It is absolutely crucial to winning the war on terror.''

Both the president and the vice president focused on the Sunday deadline. It was set in United Nations Resolution 1441, which was adopted unanimously by the Security Council last month. By that day, the Iraqi government must provide the Council with a ''currently accurate, full and complete declaration of all aspects of its programs to develop chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, ballistic missiles and other delivery systems.''

That wording was carefully negotiated as the administration tried to build a box from which Iraq has no easy escape. If Mr. Hussein fails to provide a complete list of his weapons and the United States can prove he is lying, he will have breached the most recent United Nations resolution, officials said. That would constitute the kind of continuing material breach that the administration has said could warrant military action.

Yet if he provides a full list acknowledging that he has weapons of mass destruction, they said, he will have admitted flouting United Nations resolutions for years.

''If Saddam Hussein indicates that he has weapons of mass destruction and that he is violating United Nations resolutions,'' said Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, ''then we will know that Saddam Hussein again deceived the world. If he said he doesn't have any, then I think that we will find out whether or not Saddam Hussein is saying something that we believe will be verifiably false.''

Or, as Mr. Bush said today: ''On or before the 8th of December, Iraq must provide a full and accurate declaration of its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs. That declaration must be credible and complete, or the Iraqi dictator will have demonstrated to the world once again that he has chosen not to change his behavior.''

Mr. Bush said he viewed war as the last option.

''Yet the temporary peace of denial and looking away from danger would only be a prelude to broader war and greater horror,'' he said. ''America will confront gathering dangers early, before our options become limited and desperate.''
