

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; INSPECTORS FIND EMPTY WARHEADS IN AN IRAQI DEPOT
By Julia Preston
Jan. 17, 2003

United Nations weapons inspectors discovered 11 empty chemical warheads today at an ammunition storage depot in southern Iraq, while another team entered the homes of two Iraqi scientists unannounced, carting away documents.

The inspectors stumbled on the warheads in a bunker at the Ukhaider Ammunition Storage Area, about 90 miles southwest of Baghdad. The trove included 11 empty 122-millimeter chemical warheads and ''one warhead that requires further evaluation,'' said Hiro Ueki, the spokesman for the inspectors in Baghdad. He did not elaborate.

He said the warheads were in ''excellent condition'' but added that they were ''similar to ones imported by Iraq during the late 1980's.'' He noted, however, that they had been found in bunkers that were not constructed until the late 1990's.

Experts on the arms team, as well as intelligence analysts in Washington and other capitals, rushed to determine whether the warheads had been listed in the voluminous weapons declaration Baghdad presented to the United Nations in December.
The team took X-rays of one warhead and collected samples for chemical testing, he said.

Lt. Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, the top Iraqi liaison to the weapons teams, expressed ''astonishment'' over the hubbub about the warheads, saying they were short-range shells imported in the late 1980's. He insisted that they were registered in the declaration.

He said that the boxes containing the munitions were covered with dust, and that the warheads were empty.

''No chemical or biological warheads,'' he said at a news conference, ''just empty rockets which are expired and imported in 1988.''

A report issued in 1998 shows that an earlier team of inspectors made a similar discovery at the Ukhaider facility, coming upon 12 155-millimeter shells, filled with mustard gas, by a roadside near the depot.

Although Iraqi officials asserted at the time that the chemical agent was old and deteriorated, the inspectors found that the mustard gas ''was still of the highest quality.'' The 1998 report said Iraq had failed to account for 550 mustard gas shells it said had been ''lost'' in 1991.

Inspectors went to the Baghdad homes of two scientists, Faleh Hassan, a physicist, and Shaker el-Jibouri, a nuclear scientist who lived next door. The inspections were the first carried out in private homes.

The inspectors spent six hours in the home of Mr. Hassan, and at the end he emerged with them carrying a box of documents and drove away in a United Nations vehicle. The papers were ''related to past proscribed activities,'' Mr. Ueki said.

During the inspection, Demetrius Perricos, director of operations for the weapons teams, had a heated argument with Iraqi officials in front of Mr. Hassan's house. ''I'm not happy about all of this,'' he said.

After the house inspections, the teams drove to a field west of Baghdad, where they and Mr. Hassan briefly examined a mound of earth, The Associated Press reported.

Mr. Hassan complained that the inspectors had occupied his home for two hours and looked everywhere, ''including into beds and clothes.'' He said the papers inspectors studied were for ''personal research.'' Waving what he said were his wife's medical X-rays, he complained that she was ill, and he accused inspectors of invading her privacy.

Two more Iraqi scientists that the inspectors asked to interview insisted that government officials be present, General Amin said.

President Bush said again today that time was getting short for the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, to give up prohibited weapons.

''So far the evidence hasn't been very good that he is disarming,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech in Scranton, Pa. ''And time is running out. At some point in time the United States' patience will run out.''

The administration has not let up in its pressure on the inspectors to work faster and more aggressively.

In London, Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief atomic inspector, said that the inspectors would become more aggressive but that they required more time to do a thorough job. ''We still have a bit of work to do, and therefore we are going to ask for at least a few months to be able to complete our job,'' he said.

In Moscow, Foreign Minister Igor S. Ivanov protested the Bush administration's pressure on the inspectors.

''We are concerned about the mounting pressure on the international inspectors and the heads of inspections teams in Iraq on the part of certain circles in Washington,'' Mr. Ivanov said. He said that the inspectors ''represent dozens of countries,'' and that Russia is waiting for ''objective and highly professional'' information from them.

Hans Blix, who heads the chemical and biological weapons team, issued one of his bluntest warnings yet to Iraq, saying that if it does not provide better cooperation, it will face ''the other major option, the one that we have seen taking shape in the form of armed action against Iraq.''

Up to now Mr. Blix has said he was reluctant to bring Iraqi experts out of the country for interviews, as Washington has insisted, until all the logistical details were worked out, including granting asylum in some foreign country once they left.

Today Mr. Blix changed his message, saying one way Iraq could show better cooperation ''would be to let them talk without any minder present,'' adding, ''Another would be to accept that they go abroad, if they want to do so.''

In a Security Council meeting here today, the United States stepped back from a confrontation with other nations over how to reconcile timetables for the inspections laid out in two different Council resolutions. The American ambassador, John D. Negroponte, said Washington would handle the dispute ''in a way that maintains Council unity on one hand and keeps the pressure on Iraq.''

The Council's discussion was about whether the inspectors should follow the steps in Resolution 1441, which set up the current inspections regime, or in Resolution 1284, the December 1999 measure that first established the weapons teams. American officials said they did not agree with a proposal by Mr. Blix to issue a major report at the end of March on the work still to be done, as called for in Resolution 1284.

The Council agreed to leave the debate until after a report by the inspectors scheduled for Jan. 27.

As part of the steady buildup of forces in the Persian Gulf region, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld was considering the deployment of three more aircraft carriers within striking distance of Iraq, Pentagon and military officials said today.

The deployment order, which would bring to five the number of aircraft carriers around Iraq should Mr. Bush order the nation to war, had not been signed by late tonight, officials said.

The carrier Harry S. Truman was already sailing in the Mediterranean, and the Constellation was in the Persian Gulf. Draft orders now under consideration would deploy the Theodore Roosevelt from the East Coast, the Abraham Lincoln, which is now in Australia, and the Kitty Hawk, based in Japan.

Officials said that because of tensions with North Korea, the Carl Vinson would sail from the West Coast to fill the Kitty Hawk's position in Asian waters, according to the proposed deployment orders.

The George Washington, based on the East Coast, was told to be ready for speedy deployment.
