

BUSH TO PUT CASE FOR ACTION IN IRAQ TO KEY LAWMAKERS
By Alison Mitchell and David E. Sanger
Sept. 4, 2002


Senators urged President Bush today to make a convincing case for taking military action against Iraq, and the White House announced that the president would meet with Congressional leaders on Wednesday to make his arguments for confronting Saddam Hussein.

Returning from a summer break, senators said that Mr. Bush would make a grave mistake if he did not seek a full debate and some kind of Congressional authorization for military action.

Some of the strongest criticism came from Democrats, but even a number of Republicans who are usually staunch supporters of the administration said that the president had to make a better case. ''I do think that we're going to have to get a more coherent message together,'' said Senator Trent Lott, the Republican leader from Mississippi, even as he said the threat presented by Mr. Hussein could not be ignored.

After weeks of complaints from allies and conflicting signals from the administration, the statements today from Congress and senior officials suggested that pressure on the president was mounting to set a clear course of action as world leaders prepared to meet next week at the United Nations.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, arriving in Johannesburg for an environmental summit meeting, said Mr. Bush would make a decision on Iraq ''in the very near future.''

Some senators demanded hard evidence to back up Vice President Dick Cheney's contentions that Mr. Hussein is close to producing a nuclear weapon and poses an urgent threat to the United States.

Speaking to reporters at the Pentagon, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said that ''we know some other things,'' beyond what has been said publicly so far, ''but those are the kinds of things that would come out if and when the president decides that he thinks it's appropriate.''

While Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, virtually alone among world leaders, came out today in strong support of the administration's position, senators raised concerns about alienating allies needed for the broader campaign against terrorism, as well as about divisions within the administration itself.

Secretary Powell acknowledged those differences today, but said that ''some are real, some are perceived, some are over-hyped.''

Iraq used the summit meeting in South Africa to try to blunt any momentum for military action by the United States. Tariq Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister, met with Secretary General Kofi Annan on the sidelines of the meeting, to discuss the return of United Nations weapons inspectors.

''We are ready to cooperate with the United Nations,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''If the question of so-called weapons of mass destruction is a genuine concern by the U.S., then the matter could be dealt with.''

Mr. Bush's team is clearly concerned that Iraq will use the prospect of weapons inspections to ease pressure, and the White House responded that Iraq has made similar promises many times before.

Administration officials also declared flatly that even if arms inspectors were given unfettered access to Iraq's suspected nuclear sites, Mr. Bush was still committed to the ouster of Mr. Hussein. ''The policy of the United States is regime change, with or without inspectors,'' Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, told reporters today.

For now, the first challenge facing the president comes in persuading Congress.

Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the majority leader, said: ''I think most Democrats believe that the president has yet to make the case for taking action in Iraq. That hasn't been done.''

He tartly noted the open differences of opinion inside the administration and he warned that it was dangerous for the United States to flout world opinion.

''I think unilateral action has very very dire consequences for our country,'' he said.

Senator Lott, who weeks ago played down any need for formal Congressional action, today said he felt confident that the administration would ask for Congressional approval and would benefit politically from a full Congressional debate.

Mr. Lott said he agreed with Vice President Cheney's rationale for taking military action against Iraq because ''we cannot ignore this problem of Saddam Hussein and his weapons of mass destruction.''

But at another point, asked if he was comfortable with the White House message on Iraq, Mr. Lott said, ''I'd like to have a couple more days before I respond to that.''

Senator Larry E. Craig of Idaho, the third-ranking member of the Senate Republican leadership, said that if a vote were held today he would oppose military action against Iraq ''because I don't think the case has been made to the American people.''

Mr. Bush's decision to take up the Iraq question with members of Congress comes after weeks of open division and mixed messages from the administration. He himself has been silent on his plans for Iraq, and Mr. Fleischer said today that Mr. Bush intended to consult broadly before making up his mind.

Mr. Rumsfeld insisted today that the administration wants Iraq to let weapons inspectors return without any conditions.

''And I haven't seen any inclination on their part to agree to anything except as a ploy from time to time,'' he said, saying the Iraqis sought to ''kind of play the international community and the U.N. process like a guitar, plucking the right string at the right moment to delay something.''

While Mr. Bush may resolve some of the mysteries surrounding his own views when he speaks publicly on Wednesday morning after his meeting with members of Congress, the White House today did little to resolve a central conundrum: How can the United Nations persuade Iraq to allow inspections if Mr. Bush is still vowing to remove him?

It is that issue which has helped inflame the Europeans and Arab states, which charge that Mr. Bush is not interested in a diplomatic solution of any kind. But today, Mr. Fleischer said: ''The leaders are reacting to a case that has not been made.''

Mr. Bush's insistence on ousting Mr. Hussein, European and Arab leaders say, also eliminates any incentive for the Iraqi leader to withhold the use of chemical or biological weapons if military action is taken. Several NATO leaders have warned that by demanding the Iraqi leader's ouster, Mr. Bush is encouraging Mr. Hussein to fight for survival with whatever weapons he has on hand.

The question of whether a president can wage war without Congressional approval has been a constant tension across the years, and even lawmakers who back aggressive action against Iraq said that Mr. Bush now should seek Congressional support as a way of rallying the nation around him.

''I believe technically the president is not required to come to Congress; politically, I believe it would be foolish not to,'' said Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona. ''I think it would be good for the country to have the debate here.''

Senators also raised a host of questions about whether war with Iraq would only inflame tensions with the Middle East and whether it would undercut international cooperation in the campaign against terrorism.

''The administration is presenting Iraq as if it were the only foreign policy concern,'' said Senator Bob Graham, the Florida Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee. ''In fact, there are a whole series of concerns.''
