

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Kurdish Leader May Spare Man Who Tried to Kill Him
By C. J. Chivers
Dec. 31, 2002


On the day he would become a killer, Qais Ibrahim Khadir awoke in the most cheerful of moods. He had an automatic rifle and a bag of grenades. His target was the prime minister, and Mr. Khadir knew where he lived. He felt a surge of joy.

''From the moment I woke up until I executed my plan I was in the highest point of physical pleasure,'' he said. ''I felt as if my heart was coated with honey.''

Mr. Khadir, 27, was arrested in April after an attempt to assassinate Dr. Barham Salih, prime minister of the eastern zone of Kurdish-controlled Iraq. Unrepentant, he now resides in an unheated prison cell, awaiting trial for the killing of three of the prime minister's guards. Kurdish officials predict that he will be sentenced to death.

His fate has become a death-row tale with a twist of plot. Mr. Khadir gleefully admits his guilt and says that according to Islamic law he should be hanged. But local law requires that death warrants be signed by Dr. Salih, the very man Mr. Khadir intended to kill. Dr. Salih says he will do no such thing.

The prime minister is opposed to capital punishment. ''I think this is a fundamental question of what type of society we want,'' he said. ''I don't believe that anyone, or the state, should take people's lives.''

The case against Mr. Khadir exposes internal strains in an Eastern society now courting the West. It is also an example of the tumultuous state of affairs in northern Iraq.

Iraqi Kurdistan, as the region independent of Saddam Hussein calls itself, regards its neighbors as enemies and has enemies within. It is a land of endless intrigue, but also one that yearns for Western support as it confronts both Mr. Hussein and a brand of Islamic extremism that has attracted a small segment of its people.

Kurdish officials say Mr. Khadir was dispatched by Ansar al Islam, a militant group that controls villages along the Iranian border and is at war with the secular Kurdish government.

The officials also say the assassination plan unfolded in meetings between Mr. Khadir and Abu Musaab al-Zarqawi, a senior leader of Al Qaeda who is accused of orchestrating the assassination in October of Laurence Foley, an American diplomat who was shot outside his home in Amman, Jordan.

Two weeks ago, Ali Abu al-Ragheb, Jordan's prime minister, said Mr. Zarqawi was believed to have taken refuge in Ansar's camps, although that is uncertain. Mr. Khadir insists that he planned the attack himself. In prison interviews, he said he never met Mr. Zarqawi, although he did say he discussed his plans with an international visitor in the camps ''who looks like him.''

Mr. Khadir's credibility appears doubtful. In conversation, he is evasive, raising doubts even as he provides answers to questions.

For example, a native Iraqi Kurd, he studied at an Islamic school in Yemen. When asked if he met any members of Al Qaeda there, he quickly said, ''None.'' For a moment he sat wide-eyed and compliant, waiting until his answer was written down. Then he burst into a deep, extended laugh.

Whatever the origins of his intentions, by his accounts and those of Kurdish intelligence officials, Mr. Khadir and two accomplices from Ansar bases planned to kill Dr. Salih on April 2 as he stepped into a sport utility vehicle in front of his home. Dr. Salih was saved by a phone call that came as he was walking to the door.

The call prevented the prime minister from stepping outside as the shooting began. In the furious battle that erupted, two of the assassins and five Kurdish guards were killed.

Mr. Khadir, who suffered two gunshot wounds near his left knee, limped away and was captured within hours.

When security officials drove him to the scene of the shootout, he told them that, given the chance, he would try to kill the prime minister again. Enraged, one official cocked the hammer on a pistol and held the barrel to the suspect's chest, Kurdish officials and Mr. Khadir said.

Mr. Khadir recalled the encounter with disdain. ''I wished he would have pulled the trigger,'' he said. ''But I knew he wouldn't. He was weak, like a politician. It was just his tactic.''

He has confessed to killing three of the guards, and now he awaits a conviction and death, chuckling at all talk of mercy or restraint. ''It will be a shame for human rights organizations if they execute me,'' he said. ''But what about the rights of the people I killed?''

The man who might keep him alive is the man he wants to kill. Since becoming prime minister two years ago, Dr. Salih said, he has received more than 20 death warrants from the courts. He has refused to sign any of them. This case is different, he said, but the same.

''I really want to avoid thinking about it in a personal way, although it is very difficult because I lost five very dear people in this episode,'' he said. ''But in my view our values should be absolutely opposed to those of the terrorists, and human life is important.''

As Mr. Salih deliberates, the people around him are largely untroubled by philosophical debate. Kurdish notions of justice can be ancient and tribal, and there is history of official excess.

In a few incidents since 1991, Kurds have summarily executed Iraqi prisoners, and in 1996, when Kurdish opposition forces withdrew from northern Iraq after a coup attempt against Mr. Hussein failed, a group of suspected saboteurs and Iraqi agents were hastily shot in a prison at an intelligence compound near here, so they would not be freed.

Dr. Salih has a different background than previous Kurdish leaders. A British citizen whose wife and children live near Washington, D.C., Dr. Salih said he hoped to break with elements of the region's past.

''A lot of nasty things have happened in this part of the world,'' he said. ''But I was disgusted by them, and a lot of Kurdish people were disgusted by them.''

Still, there is palpable institutional disagreement, and Mr. Khadir's fate is anything but clear. Col. Wasta Hassan, one of Mr. Khadir's jailers, has volunteered to kill the prisoner himself.

''He should not be just executed,'' the colonel said, twisting one fist above the other and grimacing, as if throttling a foe. ''We should squeeze him, so he doesn't have anything left in his body. Then we should execute him.''

Another security official, who has been involved in Mr. Khadir's interrogation, offered a different solution. ''We should take him somewhere and shoot him, outside of the city,'' he said. ''Then we will take him back to the hospital and leave him there, to be buried.''

Mr. Khadir is hardly ingratiating himself with his captors. He admits to being a Qaeda sympathizer and expresses delight about the attack on the World Trade Center. ''I was quite happy when I saw it,'' he said.

Upon hearing Mr. Khadir's latest remarks, the interrogator shook his head. ''Obviously he will be executed,'' he said. ''He has no soul.''
