

The Nation: The Iraq Factor; At Home, Most Politics Is Local
By Carl Hulse
Sept. 29, 2002


IT'S evidently not good politics to politicize the war on Iraq. But politicizing the politicization of the war with Iraq is another matter.

Ask Mike Feeley, a Democratic Congressional candidate from Colorado and Marine veteran who still has a feel for combat. An upset Mr. Feeley threatened last week to expose every ''chicken hawk Republican'' running for office if President Bush did not apologize for saying the Democrat-controlled Senate was ''not interested in the security of the American people.''

Mr. Feeley's threat to expose pro-war Republicans who never wore the uniform as part of his race for an open seat in a new suburban Denver district is one of the more novel ways that Iraq and national security have been injected into a campaign so far.

There have been suggestions in the South Dakota Senate race that the incumbent Democrat, Tim Johnson, is suspect because he opposed the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Mr. Johnson countered with support from veterans unhappy that war could be used as a political weapon. In Senate races in Minnesota and South Carolina, the national defense credentials of Democratic candidates have been political fodder for their opponents.

Beyond Washington, where it is all Iraq, all the time, the issue is obviously on the minds of voters as well. One new poll by the Pew Research Center showed that 55 percent of Americans said they had given the prospect of war a great deal of thought, up almost 10 percent in a month. The subject provides persistent political background noise, a distinct hum. But on the campaign trail, it is still the old standby issues of health and hearth that candidates from both parties talk most about and that voters are still interested in, according to analysts and candidates.

Sure, voters want to sound out the contenders on national defense. They then quickly move on to the pocketbook stuff -- Social Security and prescription drug coverage, or jobs and the struggling economy, with the possibility of some specific local issue thrown in.

''When we ask voters to volunteer spontaneously what they wanted to hear about, they said the economy and health care and a whole range of domestic issues as much, if not more, than the war on terrorism,'' said Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center. ''My guess is we have two tracks here'' with ''the national media's focus on the national conversation about Iraq and terrorism.''

In various Senate and House races, both Republicans and Democrats say Iraq is not a predominant topic, perhaps partly because of the sensitivity to being seen as trying to exploit it. Republicans, who revel in national security debates, hope to gain from the focus on Iraq through osmosis, absorbing the benefits without much overt effort. Democrats seem eager to show they are as concerned about security as anyone else.

''Certainly foreign policy and Iraq are going to play a part and that will help Republicans, but when you get down to the local districts voters are going to be making a lot of their decisions on prescription drugs, health care in general and Social Security,'' said Towson Fraser, a spokesman for the Republican Party of Florida, where a handful of competitive House races are being waged.

So while Democrats fret that their issues have been pushed off the table on Capitol Hill by Iraq, those same Democrats are watching the suspended Congressional debate play out at the local level.

''All of the ads that are being run, all of the dialogue in the campaigns, is about domestic issues,'' said Richard A. Gephardt, the House Democratic leader, ticking off a list of health and economic concerns.

Social Security remains Topic No. 1 in almost every case. Take the North Carolina Senate race, where Erskine B. Bowles, a Clinton White House chief of staff, and Elizabeth Dole are duking it over retirement security.

''From a campaign standpoint, the candidates have not been talking about Iraq at all,'' said Scott R. Falmlen, executive director of the North Carolina Democratic Party. ''They are talking about Social Security and Medicare in their television ads, and minimum wage a bit.''

And they are not talking very nicely. The latest party ad on behalf of Mr. Bowles accuses Mrs. Dole of wanting to privatize Social Security; Mrs. Dole says her opponent is employing ''shameless'' Clinton-style tactics when it was he who supported his former boss's 1993 plan increasing taxes on Social Security benefits.

That latest charge -- that BillClinton and the Democrats hurt Social Security benefits -- is the new counter to the Democratic effort to show that Republicans will put the sainted Social Security system at risk by allowing investment in the stock market, an idea that looked better a few years ago than it does today.

''They want to talk about Social Security, fine,'' said Mitch Bainwol, executive director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. ''We are taking it to 'em.''

The landscape appears the same around the country: Social Security and Medicare dominate, followed by drought in South Dakota, textiles in the Carolinas, abortion here and there. So far, Democrats do not seem to get much traction hammering away on the general theme of a sinking economy, but they hope that the 401(k) statements due in the next few weeks will incite voters.

MR. KOHUT said his latest survey showed that on health care and the environment, voters continue to view Democrats with more confidence, while the parties are about even on the economy. Republicans were viewed as more capable of dealing with corporate wrongdoing, a surprise to Democrats since they had hoped that this was their issue. The quick Republican response on accounting reforms seems to have neutralized it.

One potential trouble spot Mr. Kohut saw for Republicans was that if voters perceive President Bush and Republicans as too fixated on foreign policy at the expense of financial security, it could ignite a backlash. But the election is just weeks away.

If voters are hearing most about domestic issues and if Democrats have the advantage there, why do some analysts still see the party as lagging in its drive to reclaim the House? Congressional races are fought district by district, and 50 or fewer are truly in play. In addition, Republicans have been able to fight back on Social Security, and House Republicans can point to passage of a Medicare drug plan, even though Democrats say it falls woefully short.

The war talk and its political power remain a question mark. If Congress quickly adopts a resolution with significant bipartisan support, perhaps it disappears. But Democrats themselves are raising the prospect of extensive floor action that may slow the debate. And then, once a vote occurs, opponents might jump on a lawmaker's position as legitimate grounds for attack.

Then there is the uncertainty of how any move on Iraq by the White House might influence the vote. ''The political picture is obviously in flux and might not be sorted out until Election Day,'' Mr. Kohut said. ''There are so many jokers in the deck and potential wild cards that forecasting what the trend might be is fool's work.''
