

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD -- KIRKUK; Iraqis Abandon Post And Kurds Advance
By C. J. Chivers
March 28, 2003

The first crack in Saddam Hussein's once formidable northern defense line appeared here today at this Iraqi checkpoint on the main highway into Kirkuk, a city rich in oil and strained by ethnic tensions.

This post, formerly bristling with soldiers and Iraqi border guards who exacted bribes from travelers passing through the militarized zone, was unexpectedly abandoned this afternoon by Iraqi soldiers.

The soldiers had defended it since the first gulf war in 1991, when the Kurds set up an independent enclave to the north. The Iraqis left quietly, loading onto trucks and slipping quickly away.

The action came just hours after more than 1,000 American paratroopers jumped into friendly Kurdish territory in advance of the opening of a northern front. But those soldiers played no role in the Iraqi move, which occurred without a shot being fired.


The Iraqis' departure opened the road from the Kurdish-controlled zone into Kirkuk, and Kurdish civilians and fighters streamed in behind them, beginning what appeared to be an advance on a city of roughly 600,000 that is one of the war's ultimate political and economic prizes.

The withdrawal appeared to stop a few miles short of Kirkuk's outskirts, and for Kurds the day became both festive and ominous.

The departure provided the first tangible signs of weakness along a front where Mr. Hussein's troops have outnumbered Kurdish fighters to a degree that had almost seemed absurd. It sparked a joyous celebration outside the nearby Kurdish town of Chamchamal.

As Kurds sensed their enemy had begun to buckle under the pressure of American bombs, some men fired rifles into the sky. Others whooped. Civilians on bicycles pedaled past silent guard shacks, heading into territory claimed from an enemy they readily admit they hate.

''Saddam Hussein is a son of a dog,'' declared Rakout Hamed Karim Shafi, a young smuggler. Mr. Shafi was walking along the road with a newly acquired possession, a rocket-propelled grenade he had lifted from a vacated Iraqi bunker.

But by nightfall, as Mr. Shafi displayed his weapon, there were worrisome signs that the jubilation might give way to mob rule on a front where significant numbers of American soldiers have yet to appear and civil order may be difficult to establish and maintain.

''Kirkuk is a disaster waiting to happen,'' said Hania Mufti, a researcher for Human Rights Watch, an independent group, which has warned that a coordinated plan is needed for Kirkuk to avoid interethnic violence and reprisal killings against Iraqi officials.

There were flashes today of disarray. As Kurdish commanders and officials said they had advanced more than seven miles into Iraqi-controlled territory, and had taken positions about four miles from withdrawing Iraqi soldiers, there were signs of looting.

Rostam Homed Rahim, the local Kurdish commander, was warning his fighters, known as pesh merga, to restrict journalists from reaching this point in the lines, saying the looting that was beginning might embarrass the Kurdish government.

It was of little use. Journalists slipped through, encountering soldiers and civilians returning to Chamchamal laden with war booty, even as others were heading in, driving empty cars or pushing empty carts.

It seemed as if anything and everything had been deemed worth stealing, even from the meager assortment of junk the Iraqis left behind.

Some items had military utility, including a heavy machine gun, binoculars, a kerosene lantern, and crates of ammunition or sacks of plastic water jugs.

But other items spoke of almost gleeful grabbing of whatever could be lugged or rolled away, including furniture, ratty clothing and a newly claimed motorcycle with two flat tires. Two civilian men rolled an empty water barrel down the road, amiably chatting, businesslike, as they headed toward their village.

Many spoke quickly, almost babbling, men who seemed to be riding an adrenaline surge.

These men are Kurds, a people who have been gassed, tortured, relocated, expelled, and executed by Mr. Hussein's military and security forces. They have long showed an almost unanimous support for war, any war, that promised to remove a president they regard as their executioner-in-chief.

They cheered the nation that had spurred the withdrawal. ''U.S.A. good,'' said Aziz Karim, a local resident. ''Very, very good.''

They wandered a ghostly front. For 12 years the northern lines separating Iraq proper from the autonomous Kurdish zone have passed through this plateau, forming an advance line of trenches, bunkers and concertina wire, all reinforced by tanks and artillery the Iraqi Army has kept a few miles back.

What had lasted 12 years collapsed after just a few days of bombing. An American airstrike leveled the command bunker on this ridge yesterday morning. The bunker, ringed with antennas, was destroyed in a thunderous explosion.

Even before the narrow collapse here today, Jalal Talabani, leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, which controls the eastern Kurdish zone, suggested that under such attacks, the conscript Iraqi soldiers along the northern lines were in a pitiable state, wearied by a combination of recent drenching rains and American bombs.

''They suffered too much, the Iraqi Army,'' Mr. Talabani said. ''Now they are very afraid. They are afraid to live in their trenches, and now it is raining, and they don't know where to go.''

His words seemed prescient later. Within hours, as Mr. Talabani was about to enter a meeting with Zalmay Khalilzad, President Bush's special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, and Lt. Gen. Colby M. Broadwater III, a Central Command commander, he received word that Bani Maqan was changing hands.

He clutched the general's arm. ''Bani Maqan has been captured,'' he said. ''It was taken by simple people, not pesh merga.''

A guerrilla leader turned politician, Mr. Talabani beamed.

Two moments he has worked for during much of his life -- the capture of a city he regards as Kurdish and the fall of Mr. Hussein -- seemed another step closer, and he was delivering the news to an American general.

Still, the military significance of the withdrawal was not immediately apparent. It could not be determined tonight if the withdrawal was a coordinated consolidation of Iraq's northern lines or if it was the first sign of headlong retreat.

It was also not clear if the departure reflected in any way the condition of Republican Guard units further west and south, which Kurdish officials insist have suffered heavy casualties under American bombardment, based on information they say is collected from their underground networks.

On Wednesday, American paratroopers jumped into Kurdish territory and set up a perimeter at an airfield in Harir.

The airfield was already in the hands of Kurds, and Kurdish officials said the Army's jump was essentially a public relations exercise, and an effort to inject fear among Iraqi troops, signaling to them that American soldiers can appear any time.

American fighters were, however, believed to have played a role in the events here by directing air attacks against Iraqi positions. Kurds suggested that the air support was continuing on the road to Kirkuk, and at one point tonight the local commander warned his troops to limit their advance.

''We have asked the American jets to bomb everything,'' Mr. Rahim said. ''If we go there, maybe we will be bombed ourselves.''
