

Correspondence/The Cult of Popularity; Fear Has Its Own Language in Iraq
By Neil MacFarquhar
Jan. 19, 2003

ASKED his thoughts about replacing Iraq's government by force, Sheik Talel al-Khalidi, a member of parliament and tribal leader from Mosul, launches into one of those all-too-common sermons about President Saddam Hussein winning 100 percent of the vote in a referendum last October.

He demands to know how the Bush administration can possibly ignore such overwhelming support, prompting a visitor to note that Americans tend to respect election results when voters actually have a choice.

''But there was a choice!'' the sheik protests. ''People could vote yes or no.''

Any interview in Iraq runs the risk of capsizing beneath the flood of Orwellian language that courses through all public discussions, rendering true thoughts and sentiments extremely elusive. Occasionally someone angry or reckless enough voices harsh criticism of the Iraqi government, but such encounters are both furtive and extremely rare.

Since most interviews between Iraqis and the Western press are organized and monitored by minders from the Ministry of Information, many Iraqis take the prudent step of garnishing their remarks with some praise for their president. This is an old-school totalitarian regime, after all, where criticizing the president is illegal, and parents have been known to disappear after their children parroted anti-Hussein remarks heard at home.

Foreigners with long experience here believe this is a matter of conditioning, of fear and self-censorship that have become innate. Iraqis are raised from childhood to sing -- often literally -- the president's praises.

They are also taught to mistrust foreigners. So when they find themselves talking to a foreigner, they respond as if by rote, often with safe, stock phrases.

T HE most telling example of this conditioning in recent weeks has been the attempt by arms inspectors to interview scientists confidentially about Iraq's efforts to develop nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. In the few cases publicized, the scientists involved refused to be interviewed outside Iraq, and even requested the presence of a government representative.

''It is hard to be sure that the person being questioned can tell the truth,'' said a Western envoy here. ''Iraqis have already internalized how they are supposed to act, what they are supposed to say, how they are supposed to think.''

Often it's a question of degree. Some Iraqis make a few passing laudatory remarks and get on with the subject at hand, making the interview interesting and worthwhile. Others manage to weave the president's name into virtually every sentence, overwhelming the possibility that they will say anything a reporter could mistake for an independent, thoughtful judgment.

Take the question of how the young generation, the students now in college, view the world after having grown up living through both the Iran-Iraq war and the 12 years of international economic sanctions imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.

A request to the Ministry of Information, mandatory to talk to a few learned sources on this subject, led to an interview with Nahida Abdel-Karim Hafez, a sociology professor at Baghdad University. Others in different academic fields had already said that young Iraqis live in a world of limited horizons, but her responses reverted to one rote phrase.

''The Iraqi personality is strong because of our culture, our heritage and the wisdom of the leader,'' said the middle-aged professor, her head veiled in a white scarf. ''Such a personality, depending as it does on our culture, our history and the wisdom of the leader, faces any future with strength.''

After 20 minutes of riffs along this theme, it seemed wise to end the interview.

THE southern port of Basra suffered more than most Iraqi cities for more than two decades because of its proximity to both Iran and Kuwait. It was battered by artillery or bombs in both conflicts, and nearby residents suffer seemingly higher rates of cancer that might be linked to depleted uranium shells. A request to the Ministry of Information to meet an Iraqi professional to gauge how the standard of living diminished alarmingly over this period led to the home of Abbas al-Rikabi, 53, an English professor at the University of Basra.

Since graduating from the University of Wales in 1983, he and his wife have raised their four children in a battered, water-stained, three-bedroom modular home that they rent from the university. The 100 such homes in what is basically a trailer park were put up in 1975 as temporary housing. The family spent much of the 1980's making daily runs to a bomb shelter -- their water and electricity knocked out by Iranian shelling. The professor, a member of the Baath Party, earns the equivalent of roughly $100 a month and does not own a car.

To a question about how he perceives the weapons inspections, he segues quickly from President Hussein's claim that there are none, to unsolicited thoughts about the man: ''We love Saddam Hussein, not only love him, we adore him, he is the symbol of our unity. Without Saddam Hussein we will die, believe me.''

And what does he think will happen to Basra should there be another war?

''I want you to convey my feelings to President Bush, my feelings as an educated man. Please, Mr. Bush, leave us alone because we love Saddam Hussein.''

His oldest child is in her last year studying biology at Basra University, where one son just entered agricultural school. The two other children are in high school.

How, he was asked, do his children perceive their future?

''They are sad, they are melancholy, but we have a glimpse of hope, which is Saddam Hussein.''

It was clearly time to abandon this interview.

SOMETIMES Iraqis themselves cut off any discussion after making the necessary remarks about Mr. Hussein, evidently concerned about edging onto thin ice.

At a military parade intended to flaunt a budding civil defense network, the chaperone of one group of adolescent girls who marched ordered them to stop speaking after they made a few worshipful remarks about the leader.

When a couple of foreign reporters objected, she shooed her charges away, saying dismissively: ''We all say 'Yes, yes, Saddam Hussein.' What else could you possibly need to know?''

Another group of zealous trainees jumped in, eagerly detailing how they had learned to shoot and administer first aid. But the discussion did not last long without a reference to Mr. Hussein, with the praise popping up seemingly from nowhere.

''All of us can hit it, not only her,'' chimed in one woman about target practice. ''All of us can hit it, there is no leader except Saddam Hussein.''

Many public spectacles are staged here, and the visiting press corps is dutifully hauled to them, only to find that much of the entertainment consists of praise for Mr. Hussein. The most recent example was the inauguration of a recreational lake in Baghdad on the occasion of Army Day. (No points for guessing that it is called Saddam Lake.)

A few poets stood up before the crowd to spout spontaneous verse, the official translators struggling to keep up with what amounted to Arab rap.

''We will stimulate ourselves by saying your name, Saddam Hussein, when we say Saddam Hussein, we stimulate ourselves,'' a translator said in a rush.
