
With Potential in the Air, Iraqi Exiles Meet
By John F. Burns
July 14, 2002


Prompted by President Bush's calls for the overthrow of Saddam Hussein, former Iraqi military officers who have defected during the Iraqi ruler's 23 years in power, some as recently as the mid-1990's, are meeting here this weekend to discuss ways of helping to bring down Mr. Hussein.

The meeting, at Kensington town hall in the heart of London's fashionable West End, has drawn together several dozen former officers as well as prominent figures from Iraqi opposition groups based in Europe and the United States. Spokesmen for the officers have described it as the largest such meeting of Iraqi military defectors since Mr. Hussein seized power in 1979.

Organizers said the meeting had several aims, most important among them sending a message to military officers in Iraq encouraging them to prepare to support an American-led effort to oust Mr. Hussein. Several of the former officers here said that the Iraqi officers corps was rife with hatred for Mr. Hussein and could be persuaded to join a coup or invading force, provided they were guaranteed a future in a post-Hussein Iraq.

The approach was summarized by Ahmed Chalabi, head of the Iraqi National Congress, a London-based opposition umbrella group that has received millions of dollars in American backing under the Iraq Liberation Act of 1998.

''We are sending a message to the Iraqi military that there is life for them after Saddam, that they must not fear change,'' Mr. Chalabi told reporters. ''We want them to know that when the moment comes for a military move to bring about a change of regime, they should either join us or stay home.''

American officials from several agencies, including the State Department, the Pentagon and Vice President Dick Cheney's staff, are attending as observers. The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said on Friday that the United States was not financing the gathering, although it viewed the meeting as ''a useful tool in helping the Iraqi community move closer to the goal of a better future for the Iraqi people after Saddam Hussein.''

The meeting comes as momentum continues to build in Washington for action against Mr. Hussein. Mr. Bush was reported to have signed a presidential directive this year authorizing stepped-up covert action by the Central Intelligence Agency to encourage a coup against the Iraqi leader. More recently, the Pentagon was reported to have presented the White House with a plan for a full-scale military invasion involving as many as 250,000 American troops, operating from bases in as many as eight neighboring countries.

A major surprise as the Iraqi officers opened their meeting on Friday night was the presence of Prince Hassan bin-Talal of Jordan, brother of that country's late monarch, King Hussein. Prince Hassan spent years as heir to the Jordanian throne before King Hussein changed the succession in favor of his son, the present King Abdullah, shortly before his death in 1999. Prince Hassan was reportedly deeply embittered by the change.

Although a recent report in The New York Times quoted senior Defense Department officials as saying that American military planners are considering using Jordan as a base for air and ground attacks against Iraq, King Abdullah's government quickly responded with a denial, saying, ''Jordan will not be used as a launching pad.'' Privately, Jordanian officials said King Abdullah needed to maintain a public posture of neutrality, much as King Hussein did during the 1991 gulf war, given the large and often volatile Palestinian population in Jordan and Jordan's vulnerability to subversion and other hostile acts by Iraq.

By attending a meeting dedicated to discussing ways to overthrow Saddam Hussein, Prince Hassan appeared to be sending a message that conflicted with the position taken by King Abdullah's officials. But after a speech to the London meeting that dwelt on the historical links between Iraq and Jordan, and the close family ties between the Jordanian monarchy and the Hashemite dynasty that ruled Iraq until the assassination of King Faisal II in 1958, Prince Hassan told reporters that his presence was purely personal.

Diplomats suggested that Prince Hassan might have attended the meeting to signal to the United States that he was a better friend than King Abdullah, or, contrarily, that his presence might have been agreed to by King Abdullah as a means of balancing Jordan's public statements of neutrality. To reporters, Prince Hassan denied any political motive. ''I have no agenda at all,'' he said. ''I'm not carrying any signals. I'm not a Jordanian government official. You know the Jordanian position very clearly from official government statements.''

The London meeting, months in preparation, reflected the hopes that Mr. Bush had stirred among Iraqi opposition figures with his vow to overthrow Mr. Hussein, and also the divisions that had weakened exile opposition movements for years. For one thing, only about 50 former officers attended, well below the 90 that organizers had announced in advance. Organizers say at least 1,500 military defectors from Mr. Hussein's rule are living abroad, many of them in Europe and the United States.

One prominent absentee was Gen. Nizar al-Khazraji, a former army chief of staff embraced as a hero by Mr. Hussein during the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980's, who has presented himself in the past as a possible head of a military council to rule Iraq after Mr. Hussein's overthrow. General al-Khazraji remained in Denmark, where he is seeking asylum after giving interviews to European newspapers in which he spoke disparagingly of the London gathering as a Washington-engineered event intended to achieve American, not Iraqi, goals.

But officers attending the gathering in London gave another reason for the general's absence, one that pointed to a potentially wider problem for those seeking to enlist Mr. Hussein's former generals: The possibility that General al-Khazraji, who was chief of staff during the Iraqi poison-gas attack on the Kurdish city of Halabja in 1988, might face arrest for human rights abuses if he traveled outside Denmark. A similar fate appears to hang over some other exiled officers, many of whom served in Iraqi units accused of violently repressing Iraq's Shiite and Kurdish populations during uprisings that followed the gulf war.

But as one former officer after another took the lectern on Friday to denounce Mr. Hussein -- including Maj. Gen. Khaled Shams al-Din, who described the Iraqi ruler as ''a ruthless savage without regard for human life'' -- the picture that emerged was of an Iraqi Army that might prove as irresolute in defending Mr. Hussein now as it was during the war in 1991. Then, thousands of Iraqi troops surrendered after barely firing a shot.

''The army will defect, even those closest to Saddam,'' said Col. Hamed al-Ziadi, who defected in 1982. ''The country is dismembered under the surface. Everything is weak.''

But another officer, Brig. Gen. Saad al-Ubaidi, a former head of psychological warfare who defected in 1986, said overthrowing Mr. Hussein might not be so easy.

''Most Iraqi officers hate Saddam, but he remains very strong,'' he said. ''Even if you make a joke with a friend about Saddam, they will kill you.''
