

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SEARCH FOR WEAPONS; ARMS INSPECTORS WANT MORE TIME FOR WORK IN IRAQ
By Elisabeth Bumiller With Elaine Sciolino
Jan. 18, 2003

The Bush administration and the United Nations weapons inspectors differed sharply today on the effort to disarm Saddam Hussein, with the inspectors saying they needed more time, possibly months, while the White House said evidence was rapidly accumulating to justify military action.

The White House called the discovery by weapons inspectors of 11 empty chemical warheads in southern Iraq a ''troubling and serious'' piece of evidence in the case for war. In contrast, the weapons inspectors portrayed the discovery as evidence that their search was beginning to yield results and should be given more time to work.

At a news conference in Paris, Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief nuclear weapons inspector, called war ''the worst scenario,'' and said that ''if we can avoid that, even spending a few more months to do our job, that is time well spent.'' Dr. ElBaradei appeared with Hans Blix, the chief inspector for biological and chemical weapons, and President Jacques Chirac of France, who backed up the two men.

''The inspectors have asked for more time,'' Mr. Chirac said, adding that ''wisdom requires us to grant this request and the time that is needed.'' War, he said, ''is always acknowledgment of failure.''

In a rebuff to the Bush administration, which has said it has the authority to wage war against Iraq on its own, Mr. Chirac emphasized that only the Security Council could decide what to do if the weapons inspectors determine that Iraq fails to comply with demands to reveal and destroy its weapons arsenal.

''It's the responsibility of the Security Council and the Security Council alone to make a decision regarding the report and also the requests of the inspectors,'' Mr. Chirac said. ''If one country or another were to take a step that did not conform to what I just said, it would put itself purely and simply in contravention of international law.''

Administration officials, who have repeatedly said that the inspectors should wrap up their work without delay, played down the remarks of Mr. Chirac and Dr. ElBaradei and said that the inspectors still had 10 more days to make discoveries before a report is due on their findings on Jan. 27. In an interview to be published in Berlin on Saturday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said that by the end of January it would be ''convincingly proven'' that Iraq is not cooperating with the inspectors.

Administration officials also said they remained confident that President Bush could sway views on the Security Council and rally support for military action with a speech laying out the case against Mr. Hussein, much as he did in his address to the United Nations General Assembly on Sept. 12.

White House officials cast the discovery of the 11 empty warheads and a 12th requiring further testing as a significant development, evidence of a pattern of deception by Mr. Hussein that they plan to build on in coming days. Bush administration officials said repeatedly today that the shells were not listed in the 12,000-page declaration of weapons that Iraq made to the United Nations in December. The omission would place Mr. Hussein in violation of United Nations requirements to fully disclose his arsenal or face consequences, which the United States has said means military action.

''The president views this as troubling and serious,'' said Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary. He added that ''what the world wants to know is if Saddam Hussein has disarmed. Possession of chemical warheads is not a good indication that the man has disarmed.''

Mr. Fleischer also said that although the warheads were empty, that did not mean they were harmless. ''Putting chemical weapons into a chemical warhead is done at the last minute,'' he said.

Elsewhere, the reaction was considerably more muted. A spokesman for Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, America's closest ally, warned against a ''rush to judgment'' and said the inspectors should be given the time they need.

At the United Nations, officials said the subject of the empty warheads was not even brought up in a closed meeting of the Security Council. ''I have only one thing to say -- empty,'' a French diplomat said.

United Nations officials also said it appeared that Hiro Ueki, the spokesman for the inspection teams in Baghdad, had not fully anticipated the furor his announcement about the warheads would cause, in large part because 11 of the warheads were empty. Inspectors continued tests today on chemical samples they took from the warheads and provided no information on the 12th.

Mr. Bush ignored a question about the warheads shouted at him as the rotors of Marine One, the presidential helicopter, whirred on the South Lawn of the White House. He also refused to take questions after an hourlong visit at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center here with American soldiers wounded in Afghanistan. ''We had a chance to tell them how much we appreciated their service to America,'' Mr. Bush said.

Administration officials said today that they were encouraged by what they called the assertiveness of the inspectors. They strongly suggested that the recent findings -- the warheads and documents taken on Thursday from the homes of two Iraqi scientists -- were the result of better intelligence that the United States has begun to provide to the inspection teams. Administration officials also indicated that more dramatic results could be forthcoming.

Mr. Hussein responded to the developments today with a speech that severely threatened the United States and its buildup of forces in the region. ''The people of Baghdad have resolved to compel the Mongols of this age to commit suicide on its walls,'' he said, referring to the United States in a speech observing the 12th anniversary of the start of the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Mr. Hussein added: ''We have determined and planned to meet the aggressors. We have mobilized our abilities, including those of the army, people and leadership.'' Mr. Hussein made similar remarks before the 1991 war, which ended with an American-led coalition driving Iraqi forces out of Kuwait.

Iraqi officials have said they were astonished by the furor over the warheads, which they said were simply empty shells from the 1980's. They have also insisted that the shells were included in the December declaration to the United Nations

Administration officials dismissed the Iraqi claims as disingenuous. ''To have the Iraqis act surprised doesn't, just doesn't wash,'' said Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman.

The inspectors said they stumbled onto the warheads in a bunker at the Ukhaider Ammunition Storage Area, about 90 miles southwest of Baghdad. Mr. Ueki, the inspectors' spokesman, said that the warheads were similar to ones imported into Iraq in the late 1980's but that they had been found in bunkers not constructed until the late 1990's.

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei are scheduled to return this weekend to Iraq, where they have said they will confront Iraqi officials with what they describe as large gaps in the declaration that Iraq submitted to the United Nations in December.
