

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITARY; Baghdad Targets Picked If Hussein Holes Up There
By Michael R. Gordon
March 7, 2003

If in the event of war Saddam Hussein decides to make a final stand in Baghdad, the American military plans to send troops into the heart of the city in a coordinated ground and air campaign against centers of government power, the commander of the Army's forces in Kuwait said.

The aim is to avoid bloody house-to-house fighting that could claim large numbers of American and civilian lives, he said. The plan would also avoid a prolonged siege, which could leave the Iraqi leader in control of his capital and in a position to exploit world concern about the fate of his citizens.

In an interview at his desert headquarters in northwest Kuwait, Lt. Gen. William S. Wallace outlined a deliberate strategy that calls for patient reconnaissance, focused airstrikes by Air Force planes and Army attack helicopters and penetrations into the heart of Baghdad by armored formations, light infantry and combat engineers.

''I am talking about attacking those things from which the regime draws its power but being very careful about it so that we don't get large bodies of young Americans caught up in a house-to-house Berlin, World War II-type scenario,'' he said.

As commander of V Corps, General Wallace is in charge of the Army force that is poised to invade Iraq. His comments represented the most extensive account by the American military of how it plans, if there is war, to take Baghdad. The remarks appeared intended to signal to Mr. Hussein that the American military would not shrink from urban warfare while reassuring Americans and the world that efforts would be made to keep casualties to a minimum.

''If there is to be a fight in and around Baghdad, we're going to have to be very patient to establish the right conditions for us to engage in that fight,'' General Wallace said. ''That means making sure that the airspace over the top of Baghdad is available to our Air Force so that we can use the precision capability of the Air Force to go after discrete targets within the city without doing extensive damage.

''I think that means forming joint combined arms teams that include Air Force, Army aviation, light infantry, armored forces, engineer forces that together can go after a specific target, for a specific purpose.''

Although President Bush has not yet ordered an attack to oust Mr. Hussein, it is clear here that preparations for war are advancing. The number of V Corps soldiers is approximately 35,000 and growing.

The American military is hoping that the Iraqi government rapidly collapses under a punishing air attack and the psychological pressure of advancing American forces, relieving G.I.'s of the need to fight in of Baghdad.

But Army officials are not counting on that scenario. They say that Mr. Hussein's strategy is to use regular Iraqi troops in southern Iraq to delay the American advance and inflict casualties while keeping divisions of the Republican Guard, Mr. Hussein's elite forces, near Baghdad for the major battle.

''I think he will leave Baghdad only as a last resort,'' General Wallace said. He indicated that the United States did not plan a prolonged siege of the Iraqi capital. American ground forces, General Wallace said, would not remain on the outskirts of the city for weeks, waiting for Mr. Hussein to fall.

''I'm talking a matter of days,'' he said. ''I'm not talking about doing the bum's rush into an urban population center that we don't know anything about, though.''

The Iraqis have established two defensive rings around Baghdad, according to American intelligence. The outer ring is intended to defend against American attackers and the inner ring will help maintain internal security, intelligence officials say.

The Iraqi government has increased patrols in Shiite parts of the city, restricted the movement of important Shiite figures and warned the population not to listen to American broadcasts. ''He is a thinking and breathing enemy,'' Colonel Steven J. Boltz, the chief intelligence officer for V Corps, said of Mr. Hussein. ''He has made adjustments.''

The first step in any battle of Baghdad would be locating the remaining centers of power, General Wallace said. ''If you look at Baghdad itself, there's presidential palaces and the seats of government within the city which seem to be the places from which he controls the country. Whether that will be the case when we get there, we'll just have to see. Knowing exactly where he is pulling the strings from and how he is pulling those strings will be very important.''

Air Force planes would drop precision-guided bombs. But the Army is also planning thrusts on land into the heart of the city to attack command centers and other power centers, General Wallace said.

In this scenario, Army combat engineers could lead the way to destroy barricades and other obstacles. Tanks could follow, supported by light infantry, which would protect the armor from attacks by rocket-propelled grenades and antitank weapons.

In the Baghdad plan described by General Wallace, the formations would also be protected by air power, including Apache helicopters that could fire Hellfire missiles and protect Army formations from attacks by Iraqis on rooftops.

Special Forces would also be involved, although General Wallace was reluctant to discuss them.

''You may want to go on the ground with armored formations, tanks,'' General Wallace said. ''But tanks supported by dismounted infantry to protect them perhaps led by some kind of engineers that can break through, rapidly break through obstacles to get to the point on the battlefield where you want to be, to go after the target you're looking at.''

General Wallace did not discuss the United States Marines, but a large Marine force is preparing to head north from Kuwait into Iraq and would also be involved in a battle of Baghdad, according to American officials. American planners hope that the Shiite population of Baghdad -- representatives of the majority group in the country -- will welcome American troops. General Wallace indicated the absence of a northern front -- with American troops coming in from Turkey -- would not have a direct effect on his plans to take Baghdad after advancing from the south.

General Wallace said that he did not have a precise model in mind for the attack he is planning. The 1993 battle for Mogadishu is not a good comparison, because it was not so much a well-planned urban assault as a raid gone wrong followed by a hastily improvised rescue mission. The 1989 invasion of Panama to oust Gen. Manuel Noriega involved urban warfare, but is not a parallel since the United States had military bases in the country, even one overlooking the Panamanian capital.

''I don't know that there's a model in history,'' General Wallace said. ''I think all warfare is a balance between reconnaissance and fire and maneuver. And if you get those components in the right balance, the proper balance, regardless of whether you're fighting in an open desert or an urban environment, then you might just have it right.''
