

Sure, Sound off on Iraq, Just Not in an Interview
By Melinda Ligos
March 30, 2003

For Wesley Poriotis, it is a flashback to the Vietnam era.

Over the last few weeks, Mr. Poriotis, chairman of Wesley, Brown & Bartle Inc., a Manhattan executive-search firm that specializes in making minority placements, has spent a lot of time coaching job seekers on how to answer a question that is being asked more and more in interviews: How do you feel about the war in Iraq?

Mr. Poriotis remembers teaching executives in the early 1970's to navigate similar queries. ''It's inevitable,'' he said. ''The war is the talk of the workplace right now, and these types of questions are going to pop up.''

Certainly, the war has become the main topic of talk around the office. A recent poll by ComPsych, a performance-improvement company in Chicago, found that 55 percent of workers say they talk to colleagues about war or think about it periodically during the day.

This fixation inevitably spills over into job interviews, career experts say. But job seekers should tread cautiously; giving direct answers about the conflict could be a mistake.

''This is an explosive issue,'' said Joyce K. Reynolds, a business coach in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., who has clients in New York City. ''People are either very strongly in favor of or opposed to this war, so if you give the wrong answer, you're done.''

That was the concern of one woman in the technology field who recently sought the advice of Tory Johnson, chief executive of Women for Hire, a company in Manhattan that organizes career fairs. The woman was sitting in a potential employer's office when, in an apparent effort to break the ice, he asked her if she supported President Bush's plans to invade Iraq.

''She was about to say how she really felt -- that she couldn't believe that we were going to war -- and then she caught herself,'' Mrs. Johnson said. ''She realized she had no idea what this man's beliefs were, and she didn't want to rub him the wrong way.''

Fortunately for her, Mrs. Johnson says, someone walked into the room and interrupted the conversation, but the woman made a mental note to be better prepared for such a question in any future interview.

Albert J. Solecki Jr., an employment lawyer at Goodwin Procter in New York, said job applicants can always refuse to answer questions about politics.. ''You're well within your right to say that you don't think these questions are really germane to the job you're applying for,'' he said.

Moreover, while such questions are not illegal, they could land an employer in trouble if they allude to your religion or make assumptions about your beliefs based on your ethnic background.

Even so, job seekers who object to politically loaded questions will probably be perceived as potentially troublesome, Mr. Solecki says. He recommends that they skirt the issue by taking a neutral-sounding stance. ''You might say something like, 'My hope is that things will end swiftly,' '' he said. ''You're providing an answer, but you're still keeping your cards close to the vest.''

Mr. Poriotis recommends this line: ''I feel that we must support our troops.''

''Say something as innocuous as possible,'' he said.

Another tactic is to turn the table on the employer. ''Do a block and tackle,'' advised Allison Hemming, president of the Hired Guns, an interim staffing agency in New York. ''Offer a vague answer and then take command of the meeting by asking the interviewer their feeling on the issue.''

Or course, job candidates could hedge their bets and provide an answer they think their prospective employer might want to hear, but that could backfire, Ms. Reynolds warns. In the last presidential campaign, Ms. Reynolds remembers dining with a client, a chief executive in the cruise industry, who was interviewing a candidate for senior vice president.

Halfway through the meal, the candidate declared that he was a supporter of George Bush and figured that the chief executive was as thrilled as he was about the election's outcome. ''He couldn't stop gloating,'' Ms. Reynolds said.

But the chief executive, a Democrat, was not pleased. ''She turned to the applicant and said, 'That's very arrogant of you to make that assumption,' '' Ms. Reynolds said. ''The interview pretty much ended there.''

Interviews conducted in casual settings like restaurants are often the most dangerous, Mr. Poriotis says, because prospective hires are more likely to drop their guard than if they were in an office. ''You've got to keep your antenna up at all times,'' he said. ''If you're chatting in an informal environment, you're more likely to blurt out that you're tired because you just got back from a peace rally. But mentioning such things could immediately disqualify you.''

Another way to kill the interview is to show annoyance at an inquiry that you consider inappropriate. Ms. Hemming urges people to keep cool -- and to bear in mind that some hiring managers, especially those from smaller companies, can be unsophisticated and may not realize they are venturing into taboo ground. ''Assume from the get-go that the interviewer hasn't been trained appropriately in what types of questions to ask,'' she said.

Timmian Massie, chief public affairs officer at Marist College, which has a strong Roman Catholic heritage, recalls being upset when he was asked in an interview a few years ago for a public relations job at a Manhattan university whether his Catholic background would hamper his effectiveness at the job.

''It's obvious you're very Catholic,'' the interviewer told him. ''You wouldn't have that to relate to at our university, because we're nondenominational.''

Mr. Massie, who teaches a business-writing class at Marist, in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., said, ''The way he phrased the question was very offensive.'' But rather than express his annoyance, Mr. Massie says, he took the soul-of-reason approach, patiently explaining that he had worked at a number of non-Catholic institutions, including a gas and electric company. He got the job -- but left after six months to return to Marist, his former employer.

There is a fallback position if a hiring manager asks blatantly personal questions about your political leanings or anything else, Ms. Hemming says -- ''take it as a sign that the job wasn't meant to be.''

That is what Mr. Massie did in an interview for a job at a media-training firm in Manhattan in the early 1990's. All of a sudden, he says, an associate at the firm began asking about his dating habits.

''She started grilling me about who I dated and how often I dated,'' he said. ''When I asked her why she wanted to know, she said, 'We're like a family here, and we do everything together.' I felt very uncomfortable.''

After a few more minutes of questioning about his personal habits, Mr. Massie says, he got up and told the woman that he did not feel the job was the right opportunity.

''They called me several times after the interview to get me interested in the position,'' he said. ''I think they were part of some sort of weird cult.''
