
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.S. STILL HOPEFUL OF 9 VOTES AT U.N. FOR IRAQ MEASURE
By Elisabeth Bumiller With Felicity Barringer
March 13, 2003

Bush administration officials said today that they could still win 9 of 15 votes in the Security Council for a resolution effectively authorizing an attack on Iraq but they cautioned that the situation was extraordinarily chaotic and changing by the hour.

Still, White House officials insisted that they would force a vote on the resolution by Friday, whether or not they had the votes.

Trying to gain support for that resolution, the administration gave provisional backing to a British compromise proposal that would give United Nations weapons inspectors in Iraq a short extension, perhaps to March 21 or 24. The compromise would also require that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq meet a series of six tests, including admitting on television that he has weapons of mass destruction and that he will give them up.

But the American ambassador to the United Nations, John D. Negroponte, said, ''Before we embrace it in its entirety, we want to see how other Council members feel about it.''

President Bush spent his day making telephone calls from the Oval Office in a last-minute lobbying blitz to try to win over the fence-sitting nations on the Security Council. He spoke with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, among others. On Tuesday night from his residence, he spoke to President Vicente Fox of Mexico and President Ricardo Lagos of Chile.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, also made calls throughout the day to their foreign counterparts. But the only person who had a clear idea of where the votes stood, an administration official said, was Mr. Bush himself, who for the last three days has cleared his calendar for what has become an all-out global legislative fight.

By tonight, the tensions were spilling over into the administration itself, as the hawkish senior officials who had opposed going to the United Nations in the first place erupted in frustration that the process was becoming protracted.

One senior official referred to the frantic negotiations with an epithet and put the onus for the delays on Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who had insisted on the new resolution to gain crucial political support at home.

''Blair is driving this, and we're trying to accommodate him,'' the official said.

At the United Nations tonight, members of the Security Council were meeting to consider the six tests of the British proposal. In addition to a television confession, Mr. Hussein would be required within a week to 10 days to allow 30 Iraqi scientists to be interviewed outside the country, with their families; to surrender huge stocks of anthrax and the other biological and chemical agents that weapons inspectors said Iraq had in 1998; to pledge to destroy all its banned missiles; to account for unmanned aerial vehicles known as ''drones'' that can widely disperse chemical agents; and to surrender all vehicles that have served as mobile production laboratories for biological and chemical weapons.

Diplomats said the British proposals had been circulated as a trial balloon to see if they could move the undecided nations to support the resolution, or perhaps to persuade Russia, one of five veto-bearing members of the Council, to abstain. If the proposals appeared to be gaining no traction, the diplomats said, they would probably be abandoned.

France was still vowing to veto the resolution, no matter what, but administration officials continued to chase after a majority of Council votes. Even with a veto, they said, they would still try to portray a majority vote in the Council as a United Nations endorsement of a war.

Late today, it was increasingly unclear just how many of those votes Mr. Bush had lined up. A senior administration official at first said Guinea, one of the six undecided nations, was on board, but then said the president of Guinea had changed his mind. The official said the administration might not know if it had the votes until the last minute, on Friday.

The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, sounded a careful note of optimism. ''I wouldn't deny that we're making progress, but I wouldn't want to mislead you that we've got it in the bag,'' he said.

Mr. Boucher's caution was echoed tonight by the Pakistani envoy to the United Nations, Munir Akram, who said his country had not yet made a decision. ''We will take a decision at the final moments when we know what we have to vote upon,'' he said. ''The situation is still in play.''

At this point, the Bush administration can count on only its own vote and that of three others: Britain, Spain and Bulgaria. Six nations -- Angola, Guinea, Cameroon, Pakistan, Chile and Mexico -- are officially undecided. Five others -- France, Germany, Russia, China and Syria -- are opposed. The five permanent members of the Council that have veto power are the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China.

Throughout the day, the administration used varying pressure tactics in an attempt to gain support. The strongest threat came in Moscow, where the American ambassador, Alexander Vershbow, was quoted in the newspaper Izvestia as declaring that a Russian veto of the resolution would carry consequences.

''I'm afraid that, at least in the short term, there will be,'' the paper quoted Mr. Vershbow as saying. ''It's too bad, of course, because we have a very big agenda.''

At the United Nations, the Spanish envoy, Inocencio Arias, said in an interview that recent comments by Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld had been ''enormously counterproductive'' in the campaign to win support for the resolution. Mr. Rumsfeld said on Tuesday that the United States could proceed in a war without Britain. He quickly backed off the suggestion that Britain would not fight alongside the United States, and this morning the White House press secretary, Ari Fleischer, said he expected that England would contribute ''militarily'' to any war American military officials said today that the Navy planned ''very shortly'' to divert about a dozen battle ships from the eastern Mediterranean to new positions in the Red Sea. The Navy had planned to use the ships to fire Tomahawk cruise missiles from the Mediterranean across southern Turkey to northern Iraq, but the Turks have not granted the United States permission to use their airspace.

The ships will now be sent on a few days' journey south through the Suez Canal to the Red Sea, where they could be used to fire the missiles into Iraq across Saudi Arabia. Military officials said the move could foreshadow a Pentagon decision to shift two aircraft carriers now in the eastern Mediterranean, the Harry S. Truman and the Theodore Roosevelt, into the Red Sea.

The decision to move the ships came two days after Mr. Bush asked Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the Turkish leader who has been asked to form a new government, to help speed through the Turkish Parliament an American request to use Turkish airspace during any attack of Iraq.
