

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DISARMAMENT; BAGHDAD RESUMES DISMANTLING ARMS, BUT LISTS DEMANDS
By Neil MacFarquhar With Patrick E. Tyler
March 9, 2003

Iraq today resumed destroying its short-range Al Samoud 2 missiles and, apparently in a further attempt to exploit the deep divisions among the world's powers over war, issued a defiant list of demands to the United Nations.

Glossing over the negative aspects of the latest report by the weapons inspectors, a government statement issued from a meeting presided over by Saddam Hussein and editorials in the government-controlled press all reached the same conclusion: that Iraq had been declared sufficiently free of weapons of mass destruction to warrant the cancellation of sanctions imposed after the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

The sense here was that the strong resistance by France, Russia and Germany to the use of force against Iraq revealed a growing consensus that put the United States and Britain on the defensive.

At the United Nations, diplomats said Britain was more interested than the United States in finding a compromise that might attract more international support for the new resolution the two nations put forward on Friday. It would give Iraq until March 17 to disarm completely as demanded in Resolution 1441, passed unanimously in November.

''There is some room for maneuver,'' a British diplomat said. ''But the Americans have far less patience than we do.''

In Washington, Bush administration officials gave no indication that they would entertain any compromise that would extend the deadline for Iraq's disarmament beyond March 17.

Both at the United Nations and in Washington, diplomats and Bush administration officials expressed growing concern that if the United States called for a vote on the resolution and lost it, the coalition led by the United States and Britain would go to war in apparent defiance of the Security Council.

Officials in Washington reported a debate over whether to let the United Nations vote proceed if it appears the United States would lose. They said there was no question that the vote should go ahead if the United States believed that it could win at least nine votes, even if France or Russia vetoed the resolution.

''There's no shame in winning the vote and going ahead after a veto,'' said the official, who insisted on anonymity. ''We could easily argue the French are frustrating the will of the Council. The question is whether it is advisable to go ahead even if you are going to lose the vote.''

President Bush, in his weekly radio address today, took a far harder line than the United Nations weapons inspectors, declaring that Iraq ''is still violating the demands of the United Nations by refusing to disarm.''

Mr. Bush dismissed the destruction of the Samoud missiles as ''a public show of producing and destroying a few prohibited missiles,'' and argued anew that American intelligence -- which the administration has declined to release -- ''shows that even as he is destroying these few missiles, he has ordered the continued production of the very same type of missiles.''

In Iraq, the government destroyed 6 of the short-range Samoud missiles after a one-day hiatus, bringing the total destroyed under United Nations supervision in the last week to 40 -- approximately one-third of Iraq's known stock of the missiles.

In Tampa, Fla., the military's Central Command said its aircraft struck Iraqi positions early this morning in the desert about 230 miles west of Baghdad, a remote area near the Jordanian border. The strike, like an attack in the same region the day before, was aimed at a mobile radar system used to track aircraft and to aim antiaircraft missiles.

American commanders have long expressed concerns that this largely vacant area might be used by Iraq to fire medium-range surface-to-surface missiles at Israel if war broke out, as the Iraqi military did in the gulf war 12 years ago.

The Iraqi demands to the United Nations included a call to strip Israel of its weapons of mass destruction and force it to abide by Security Council resolutions requiring its withdrawal from occupied Palestinian territory. The government statement also said the United States and Britain should officially be branded ''liars.''

The statement by the Iraqi cabinet said the United States was still trying to use the cover of the Security Council reports to attack Iraq despite the cooperation detailed by the weapons inspectors.

Hans Blix, one of the chief United Nations inspectors, delivered a long report on Friday that included some 30 outstanding questions, mostly about the amount of chemical and biological weapons Iraq has produced and what happened to it all.

The Iraqi statement, carried by the official Iraqi news agency, said the Bush administration ''wants to cover what it wants to do with allegations that Iraq did not implement Security Council resolutions.''

''But testimonies on the truthfulness of what we say and the accuracy in implementation come from the concerned specialists led by the committee of Blix and ElBaradei,'' it said. Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief of the International Atomic Energy Agency, on Friday said his inspectors had so far detected no proof that Iraq was producing nuclear weapons.

Iraq maintains that it dismantled its weapons of mass destruction itself, but in the process also destroyed all the documentation. Although it says that it destroyed the weapons in 1991, it did not even admit to having such arms programs until 1995.

The destruction of the weapons was apparently undertaken in order to cover all traces of such programs.

In addition to the six Samoud missiles destroyed today, the United Nations said three warheads had been destroyed. Mr. Blix had ordered the destruction of all the roughly 100 completed missiles and 20 in various stages of construction because they exceeded the 93-mile limit imposed on Iraq's defensive weapons after the 1991 war.

An editorial in the leading newspaper Babel, owned by Mr. Hussein's son Oday, lashed out at the United States and Britain for pushing for war while other nations were taking a more restrained approach. It said the two countries ''insist on swimming against the current.''

''It seems members realize that the policies of Britain and the United States are pushing not only the Security Council, but the world toward the abyss,'' the paper said.

As has been the case when each such report to the United Nations has been issued in recent weeks, Iraqis in general have been tense about the possible outcome and then somewhat relieved when the possible deadline for war was shoved back by a few more days.

Still, with each passing day, preparations for war are visible in the capital, with slightly more armed Interior Ministry troops on the streets and workers filling sandbags around government installations.

''We are all afraid because we expect we could be attacked at any minute,'' said Raghad Majid, a 23-year-old art student. ''They want to attack no matter what.''

The tensions were evident on the Kuwait side of Iraq's border as well. United Nations military observers who have monitored the demilitarized zone there for the last 12 years told Reuters that they were withdrawing civilian staff members to Kuwait City for their safety.
