

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE U.N. TEAM; Chief U.N. Inspector Expects Work in Iraq to Start Nov. 27
By Patrick E. Tyler
Nov. 16, 2002


Stepping up international pressure on Saddam Hussein, the chief United Nations arms inspector said today that his team would be ready to start looking at suspected weapons sites in Iraq by Nov. 27, 10 days before Baghdad must give its accounting of its secret weapons programs.

Inspectors armed with American, British and other Western intelligence on Iraqi weapons sites plan to be in place well before the United Nations deadline, said the inspection chief, Hans Blix.

The Security Council voted last week to give Iraq until Dec. 8 to submit a ''full, accurate and complete'' declaration of any programs it had to develop nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them.

The early start puts pressure on Iraq to give an honest accounting. The United States has indicated that it will consider proof that Iraq has lied sufficient reason to go to war to disarm the government.

United States military spokesmen said Iraqi antiaircraft batteries and surface-to-air missiles fired on American warplanes patrolling the ''no-flight zone'' in Iraq today, the second time they had done so since last week's Security Council vote. The United States has warned that such attacks could be construed as a violation of the new resolution.

In response, American warplanes dropped precision-guided weapons at an air-defense communications installation about 85 miles southeast of Baghdad, the United States Central Command said. Today's strike, near An Najaf, followed one on Sunday against two surface-to-air missile sites near Tallil.

In New York today, Mr. Blix said: ''It's certainly a very significant job that we have. If we can do it in such a way that the war is avoided, we would be very happy. However, war and peace is not really in our hand.''

That issue, he said, was up to the Security Council.

He said that whether Iraq was willing to be open to the international inspections and how the Security Council judged its performance would determine whether war will come.

In Washington, Condoleezza Rice, the president's national security adviser, reiterated the Bush administration's determination to disarm Mr. Hussein, and she spoke of Iraq as a regional rival to United States power in the Persian Gulf.

Calling Mr. Hussein a ''homicidal dictator,'' Ms. Rice said it was not just that Iraq might someday link up with terrorist organizations to attack the United States. ''Terrorism is a piece of it,'' she said. ''But so is the ambition and behavior of Saddam Hussein, because sooner or later, the ambitions of Saddam Hussein and the interests of the United States are going to clash.''

In what seemed an important assertion of neutrality by the United Nations team going into Iraq, Mr. Blix, a 74-year-old Swedish diplomat, said, ''We are not on our side contending that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction.'' President Bush, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Western intelligence officials have repeatedly asserted that Iraq possesses hidden stocks of chemical weapons ingredients, biological warfare agents and illicit missiles.

''We have a great many questions,'' Mr. Blix said, adding that ''we cannot exclude'' the possibility that Iraq has such weapons, ''and we are not saying that all the intelligence is wrong -- it may be right -- but we are not also confirming it.''

Mr. Blix's comments were significant because it has become more apparent in the wake of the unanimous Security Council vote last Friday that the convergence of goals to disarm Iraq masks a great deal of underlying concern by France, Russia and China that the United States would not give the inspection process a reasonable period of time to succeed.

The Security Council resolution gives the inspection team unprecedented powers of national intrusion to disarm Iraq -- even if that means entering mosques and other sensitive sites without notice. The team will arrive in Baghdad on Monday and reclaim its offices, helicopters, jeeps and buses used to transport their experts around the country; the last inspectors left Iraq in 1998.

Mr. Blix said he expected a quick set-up in Baghdad, requiring only some fresh paint on the walls of the abandoned United Nations compound, and ''we will have to make sure that the pigeons that have broken through the windows will be chased out.''

Mr. Blix's news conference was dominated by questions of what Iraqi act of obstruction might prompt the onset of war. He used a ''flat tire'' analogy to explain his view, saying, ''If it is with the Iraqi escorts, having one flat tire is one thing; if they have four flat tires on the way out, delaying us much more, then it may be a different thing.''

Mr. Blix said the crucial issue for him in determining whether to return to the Security Council to report on an act of resistance or obstruction by Iraq would be where ''you can read an intention'' into it.

''If you have a denial of access somewhere, even if it is for a relatively short time,'' he continued, such a delay ''could be a very significant matter.''

His remarks were supported by Mohamed ElBaradei, who will accompany Mr. Blix as the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency.

''Hans Blix and I have been saying we are going to use a common-sense approach,'' Mr. ElBaradei said Thursday during a Washington conference on nonproliferation.

When Iraq makes its formal declaration of its secret programs, ''we have to look at the declaration,'' Mr. ElBaradei said. adding: ''If there is a minor omission, and this is clearly not intentional, we are not rushing to the Security Council to say, 'This is a material breach.' If we see a pattern of lack of cooperation, then we obviously have to report to the Security Council, and the Security Council will decide if that is a material breach.''

Mr. Blix praised the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, for traveling to Washington this week to admonish the Bush administration to give the inspectors time to work with the tough new powers the Security Council approved in its resolution.

Still, Mr. Blix also did not quarrel with President Bush's unrelenting public pressure.

''I think the United States government is determined that there should be no cat-and-mouse play,'' he said, adding, ''and this is how I also understood the Security Council.''

Mr. Blix said he would not carry out ''provocative'' inspections that would the risk of war. Mr. ElBaradei on Thursday criticized past infiltrations of United Nations inspection work by the Central Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Blix said today, ''We always stress the importance of being proper,'' and added: ''That doesn't mean timid -- not at all. But yes, they must be respectful in all their work.''

Most of the inspectors, who could number more than 200, will come from the United States, France, Russia and China. Jordan was the only Arab country that put forward inspectors. Mr. Blix said he would like to have more specialists from Arab countries and would endeavor to increase the number in January.
