

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; In Iraqi Capital, People Prepare As War Looms
By John F. Burns
March 18, 2003

The people of Baghdad hastened today to prepare for war, taping windows, shuttering shops and restaurants, and hauling away everything of value they could load into cars, minivans and trucks.

The 4.5 million residents of the city had little official information about the outside events that made war appear imminent, notably President Bush's announcement in the Azores on Sunday that he was calling a halt to months of United Nations diplomacy over Iraq's banned weapons and Saddam Hussein's government.

All Iraqis learned from official outlets came in the form of defiant statements from President Hussein and his ministers, who vowed in vitriolic language that American troops would be defeated.

But Iraqis have had decades of practice in evading government controls on information, relying on shortwave radio broadcasts from Europe and the United States and illicit satellite television systems that defy severe government penalties. So from the moment that Baghdad woke up today, the city was buzzing with ordinary people preparing for the conflict ahead, and rife with talk about what American war plans might portend.

As best an outsider could judge, given the widespread fear here of any candor in discussing political matters, the mood was one of deep apprehension of the immediate consequences for ordinary Iraqis of American air and ground assaults. But coupled with that, though barely whispered, there was a suppressed but fevered anticipation of the changes for the better that could come if American troops accomplish Mr. Bush's aim of toppling Mr. Hussein.

Amid the apprehension and anticipation, the people of Baghdad concentrated on doing what they could, and as almost everyone who spoke to Western reporters said, trusting the rest to God.

Huge lines formed at gas stations as people filled up with fuel that, at 2 cents a liter, is one of the few material privileges left here. Others went shopping for water storage tanks, kerosene lamps, electrical generators, flashlights and batteries, and canned food.

At a suburban school, 14-year-old boys were ordered to dig a series of trenches about 10 feet long and 5 feet deep, while chanting, ''This may look like trench, but it's not, it's George W. Bush's grave.''

Jewelers and dress-shop owners and restaurateurs emptied their premises of valuables, then locked up. The expressway westward to Jordan, an oasis of relative freedom whose border lies about 350 miles from Baghdad, was said to be busier than usual with families who had bribed officials for exit visas.

Iraqis looking for guidance from Mr. Hussein found little to help them today. State television reported that he had greeted Tunisia's foreign minister, Habib Ben Yahia, with a promise that Iraq's forces, said by Western experts to be depleted and demoralized, would overwhelm the Americans.

''We hope that the war will not take place, thanks be to God, because we do not need to test the courage and resistance of our people,'' he was reported to have said.

But he added: ''We are ready to sacrifice our souls, our children and our families so as not to give up Iraq. We say this so no one will think that America is capable of breaking the will of the Iraqis with its weapons. If the evil were to come, we would defeat it.''

On Sunday, Mr. Hussein set the tone by vowing that the United States ''should realize that the battle between us will be waged wherever there is sky, earth and water,'' suggesting that Iraq could somehow strike far outside its own borders, perhaps even in the United States.

That was coupled with remarks in which he again denied that Iraq had any banned chemical, biological or other weapons, and mocked American allegations to the contrary, saying, ''Well, give us time and the necessary means and we will produce any weapon they want, and then we will invite them to come and destroy them.''

Today, Iraqi ministers followed up with a welter of attacks on the United States. The information minister, Mohammed Said al-Sahhaf, described the Azores meeting as ''a summit of outlaws'' and ''war merchants'' who had failed to produce any proof that Iraq had banned weapons. In an interview tonight on Al Jazeera, the Arabic-language network, he said, ''I promise President Bush and Prime Minister Blair that they will leave office, and President Saddam Hussein will still be in power here.''

For years, it has been plain that the official adulation of Mr. Hussein echoed in almost every Iraqi's conversation with the Western press has masked a deep yearning for relief from repression. As American pressures have peaked in recent days, those yearnings have found new expression among people who have dared to start saying things against Mr. Hussein that still carry the potential for severe retribution, apparently because they believe that time is too short now for their worst nightmares to be realized.

Even reporting what those Iraqis say can be dangerous, and not only for the Iraqis themselves. As the hours ticked away toward the time set for Mr. Bush's televised address setting a 48-hour ultimatum for the Iraqi leader to quit power -- 4 a.m. Tuesday in Baghdad -- reporters for Western newspapers and television channels who have been working in Baghdad engaged in their own debate about whether to stay or leave, and a growing number chose to depart.

The 150 reporters still in the city, down from about 300 a week ago, were rapidly becoming the largest group of foreigners remaining. About 60 United Nations weapons inspectors, along with about 100 staff members, were expected to leave Baghdad on Tuesday morning.

One factor weighing on everyone's mind was Mr. Hussein's weekend announcement that Iraq was to be divided into four military districts, and that the Baghdad region would be under the personal command of his 36-year-old younger son, Qusay. Iraqis debated among themselves about how Saddam Hussein and his inner circle -- especially Qusay Hussein, long regarded as the heir apparent to the unlimited powers accumulated over 23 years by his father, and his 38-year-old older brother, Uday, who controls the paramilitary force known as Saddam's Holy Fighters -- would respond to an American attack on Baghdad.

Would Saddam Hussein, his sons and other high-ranking officials make a last stand in one of their many palaces, or in the vast underground network of tunnels and bunkers that German and other Western companies helped them build in the 1980's? And would they order the arrest of Westerners to be deployed as human shields at potential American bombing targets, as Saddam Hussein did with scores of Western businessmen before the Persian Gulf war in 1991, an expedient that the Iraqi leader eventually abandoned before the conflict began?

Or would they simply disappear, as Osama bin Laden did in Afghanistan, and become ''shadows'' eluding their American pursuers, as Tariq Aziz, one of Saddam Hussein's most trusted advisers, predicted in an interview with an American reporter last October?
