

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE ALLIES; U.S. Asks NATO Nations to Offer Forces for an Iraq Campaign
By Michael R. Gordon
Dec. 5, 2002

The United States asked individual NATO nations today to contribute forces to a potential military campaign to topple Saddam Hussein.

The request, which was made by Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz at NATO headquarters here, is part of the Bush administration's strategy to build a broad international coalition for a possible Iraq campaign. It coincided with a White House invitation today to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the leader of the largest party in Turkey's new governing coalition, a party with Islamic roots, to meet with President Bush. American officials expect him to visit next week.

Long a vital United States ally, Turkey has emerged as a key participant in a potential military campaign, and Mr. Erdogan -- who was jailed by the Turkish authorities in 1998 for reading an Islamic poem and is still barred by law from serving in the government he oversees from the sidelines -- has become a cherished, if unlikely partner.

Washington's standing in the Muslim world could benefit it it is seen as working closely and effectively with a popular Muslim leader like Mr. Erdogan. Moreover, United States officials appear to be counting on Mr. Erdogan to overrule aides within the government who are worried about forging too close an alignment with Washington in its fight with Mr. Hussein.

The American request for military assistance seemed to mark a shift from the position taken by President Bush in a speech to NATO leaders in Prague just two weeks ago. Then, Mr. Bush emphasized the need for NATO to transform itself from a lumbering cold-war force into a structure better suited to the war on terror. But he did not ask NATO nations for contributions of materiel or manpower to a war on Iraq.

The evolving strategy on Iraq also differs considerably from the early days of the United States intervention in Afghanistan, when the Pentagon argued that it was easier for the United States and a few key allies to handle the operation than to try to coordinate a diverse alliance. For the Afghan campaign, NATO contributed some airborne warning and control (Awacs) reconaissance aircraft to patrol the skies over the United States. NATO had no formal role in the Persian Gulf war.

In a possible Iraq campaign, however, the Bush administration has decided to seek broad international support in the United Nations and elsewhere. One reason is that the United States is seeking access to Turkey and the Persian Gulf states for help in a military campaign. Those nations will go along, provided they are seen as contributing to a broad international effort to disarm Iraq and not just to a unilateral American effort.

After his presentation at NATO headquarters today, Mr. Wolfowitz said a number of nations appeared to be interested in sending forces, including Britain, Spain, Portugal and Denmark. Many of them might not be cast in a direct combat role, however. Mr. Wolfowitz said it was too soon to tell how the organization as a whole might respond.

A NATO role in a campaign against Iraq would extend the organization's reach well beyond its traditional region. American officials have suggested that the NATO role might be justified as an effort to defend Turkey, which is a NATO ally and a major focus of the administration's current diplomatic efforts.

The administration has a good deal of diplomatic ground to cover in its efforts to gain full cooperation from Turkey in the event of an Iraq conflict.

On Tuesday, for example, Turkey's foreign minister, Yasir Yakis, said the deployment of a significant number of American troops in Turkey would be politically unsustainable. He also said a new United Nations Security Council resolution must be passed authorizing force before an American attack could be mounted from Turkish soil.

Both positions seriously complicate the Pentagon's planning. Washington insists that United Nations Resolution 1441, which outlines the Security Council's demands for determining that Iraq has abandoned its programs to develop weapons of mass destruction, provides all the authority needed for military action, if Baghdad fails to comply.

''It is an important question, and it is one that we need to clarify within the highest levels of both governments,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said, speaking about the question of whether a new resolution would be needed. ''It is one reason why we hope that Mr. Erdogan can come to Washington.''

Since coming to power, Mr. Erdogan's Muslim-based party has installed moderates in key positions, and Mr. Erdogan has courted European leaders in an effort to gain entry into the European Union. Still, there seems to be some lingering European suspicion of Mr. Erdogan, the former mayor of Istanbul.

''During his term as mayor, Erdogan had overseen major improvements in municipal services and infrastructure,'' according to a recent paper by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London. ''But he had shunned Istanbul's large Western diplomatic and journalist community, forbidden alcohol at all facilities owned by the municipality, cited the Koran as his sole reference and once famously described democracy as a vehicle which one rides as far as one's destination before alighting.''

Seeking to counter that image, Mr. Wolfowitz, in a speech in London on Monday, described Mr. Erdogan and his followers as the harbingers of a new kind of Muslim party. It is a party, he said, that respected democratic principles, favored economic reforms and had support from the voters because of demands for competent and honest government.

''Most informed observers agree that in this election Turks were casting their votes for the concept of responsible and accountable representation,'' he said. ''It has repeatedly expressed its support for the separation of religion and the state, which is the basis of Turkish democracy.''

Certainly, Washington is looking to Mr. Erdogan to close ranks on Iraq. The conversation will dwell heavily on how much economic assistance the United States might provide as well as Washington's efforts to persuade the European Union to set a date for negotiations on Turkey's eventual membership. Both items will be on the agenda if Mr. Erdogran meets Mr. Bush, along with prospects for a settlement of the Cyprus conflict.

Mr. Wolfowitz indicated that the NATO alliance could help in Iraq in several ways. First, he said, the alliance could contribute ''NATO assets,'' like Awacs planes or minesweepers. NATO nations, he said, could also provide access to airfields and airspace.
Correction: Dec. 13, 2002
Two articles on Wednesday -- one about the efforts of Greek and Turkish Cypriots to mend their divisions and one about President Bush's meeting with the leader of Turkey's governing party -- referred incorrectly to the Turkish government. (Articles on Dec. 5, 8 and 9 about Turkey's role in preparations for a possible war on Iraq also included the error.) Turkey is governed by the Justice and Development Party alone; the party won an overwhelming election victory in November.

