

MIDEAST TURMOIL: DIPLOMACY; Cheney, in Jordan, Meets Opposition to Military Move in Iraq
By Michael R. Gordon
March 13, 2002


Vice President Dick Cheney today began the most difficult phase of his 12-day mission to elicit allied support for a possible military campaign against Iraq, and he immediately encountered open opposition from King Abdullah II of Jordan.

After Mr. Cheney and King Abdullah met this evening, Jordanian authorities said in a statement that the monarch had expressed concern about ''the repercussions of any possible strike on Iraq and the dangers of that on the stability and security of the region.''

Instead of backing tough action against Baghdad, King Abdullah urged that the Bush administration's disputes with Iraq be resolved ''through dialogue and peaceful means,'' according to the statement.

The strong comments from the king's officials, and his decision to make them public, reflect concern that an American offensive against Iraq would open another front in a region already racked by instability because of the violence between Israel and the Palestinians. Its large Palestinian population and extensive trade with Iraq have long fed a Jordanian reluctance to support Washington's stance toward Baghdad.

Along with Jordanian comments on the Middle East turmoil, these remarks show that from the Arab perspective, the issues of Iraq and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict are inextricably linked. The Bush administration's push for strong action against Iraq is running up against Arab perceptions that the United States has not done enough to restrain Israel.

Mr. Cheney did not have any response to the Jordanian statement. While he has insisted that there is no direct link between a Middle East peace initiative and the Iraq policy, the two issues demand parallel efforts at solution.

Upon arriving today, Mr. Cheney reinforced that message.

''As President Bush made clear last week,'' he said, ''the United States will do all it can to help end the tragic violence between the Palestinians and the Israelis, and return the parties to a productive negotiating process.''

The administration has been calculating that however much Jordan and other Arab nations publicly assail the American effort to overthrow the Saddam Hussein regime, privately they would welcome the move or at least acquiesce in an American military campaign.

The key, American officials have said, is to tell Arab leaders that if military action is taken against Iraq, it will be decisive and relatively short. The United States would not leave a wounded Saddam Hussein in power, nor would the presence of American forces in the region be prolonged.

At the same time, the administration is seeking to assure Arab leaders that it is not insensitive to the backlash in Arab public opinion that might follow an American effort to install a new regime in Baghdad. To dampen Arab resentment, Washington says firmly that it is working actively to stem the violence between Israeli and Palestinians.

In addition, a senior official traveling with Mr. Cheney told reporters that the United States felt Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, had met the Israeli conditions for being released from house arrest and that the vice president would take up the matter during his imminent visit to Israel. Mr. Arafat wants to attend the Arab summit meeting in Lebanon later this month but has been restricted to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

While in Israel, Mr. Cheney also plans to meet with Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, the American special envoy.

But it is Iraq that has been the driving American concern. Mr. Cheney's basic argument is that Iraq's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction is a security threat on a par with the terrorist threat posed by remnants of Al Qaeda. If United Nations weapons inspectors are readmitted, they must have immediate and unrestricted access to any site in Iraq, Mr. Cheney says.

The unstated and barely disguised assumption behind his argument is that the inspectors will not be allowed to do their work properly and that the only sure way to solve the problem is to topple the Saddam Hussein regime through an American-backed insurrection or an air and ground military campaign.

In London, Mr. Cheney received a boost. Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain publicly endorsed Washington's argument that Iraq's development of weapons of mass destruction was a major threat, even as British officials privately counseled the Americans that time was needed to build popular support in Britain and win international backing.

In Jordan, however, the situation is the reverse. The Jordanians are saying publicly that the danger of instability in the region does not arise from Iraq but from the American plans to take action against the Baghdad regime.

The reason for Jordan's anxiety is clear. More than 60 percent of its population is Palestinian. The Palestinians view America as a supporter of Israel and would see an attack on Iraq not as an effort to prevent Saddam Hussein from acquiring nuclear weapons, but as a war between the West and Islam. Jordan also borders Iraq and has extensive trade with it.

''Our position is strongly against a military strike for many reasons,'' said Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher. ''We are concerned about the territorial integrity of Iraq. We are concerned about civilian casualties and the impact that could have on our own population. This is an Arab population, and there is a lot of affinity.''

Another issue, the foreign minister said, is that Jordan currently gets all of its oil from Iraq under a barter arrangement. ''A cutoff would cost us $500 million in hard currency, money we simply don't have,'' he said, in comments that may be seen as an indirect appeal for American help if action against Iraq is taken.

American assistance was one of the subjects discussed by Mr. Cheney and the king tonight.

Iraq has sought to exploit the Palestinian resentments, hoping to fan Arab opposition to American action against Baghdad. Iraq recently announced that it was increasing payments to the families of Palestinians killed in the fighting with Israelis.

Jordanian sensitivities regarding Iraq have a long history. During the 1991 Persian Gulf war, King Hussein of Jordan essentially sat on the fence. Angry Palestinians in Jordan cheered as Iraqi Scud missiles zoomed toward their targets in Israel. (The bad feeling was mutual. Mr. Cheney was defense secretary then, and one of his top aides, who had been photographed with King Hussein, turned the photo to face the wall of his Pentagon office.)

There was a flurry of diplomatic activity in the Arab world over the last few days as Mr. Cheney began his trip. King Abdullah met over the weekend here with a ranking Iraqi official, Izzat Ibrahim, deputy chairman of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council. He said later in a statement that an attack on Iraq would be a ''catastrophe'' threatening ''the security and stability of the region.''

Yesterday the king went to Damascus to meet with President Bashar al-Assad of Syria. A subject was the Saudi peace initiative expected to be put before an Arab summit meeting this month in Beirut.
