

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Inspectors Close Exits At Research Site for Hours, Confining Thousands
By Neil MacFarquhar
Jan. 6, 2003

United Nations weapons inspectors today made the most dramatic use so far of their authority to close exits and entrances to any site where they are working, confining thousands of people at a sprawling government research complex, including the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations, for almost six hours.

Ambassador Mohammed Aldouri said he had stopped for what he thought would be a quick personal visit around 9 a.m. to the National Monitoring Directorate, the Iraqi liaison office with the inspectors, which is housed at the complex here, when the United Nations team announced that no one could leave.

''I think their behavior was unjustified, and the inspection teams could behave in a more civilized way,'' a polite but fuming ambassador said from the passenger seat of the Mercedes bearing him out of the complex around 3 p.m.

''Work was delayed for no reason and the entire atmosphere created was abnormal,'' Mr. Aldouri said, adding that he passed the time reading or talking with both Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, the chief Iraqi liaison, and an unidentified friend. ''I preferred staying there the whole time so I would have a better picture of what is going on.''

Events today underscored the way both sides are stepping up the pressure in the dwindling time before the first official assessment of the inspectors' work. Hans Blix, a chief weapons inspector, is to brief the United Nations Security Council on Thursday about the 12,000-page declaration Iraq submitted a month ago.

That meeting will probably include some assessment of the inspections to date, but a more thorough presentation is scheduled for Jan. 27. Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency and head of the inspectors searching for an Iraqi nuclear program, are to visit Baghdad, probably around Jan. 19, to help complete that assessment.

Oddly, both Iraq and the United States expect that the inspections will quickly help their conflicting causes. But representatives of other countries at the United Nations envision a much longer timetable.

The United States has yet to fully share what intelligence it has with the inspectors but has kept them under pressure from the outset to find evidence it says exists that Iraq possesses weapons of mass destruction. The Bush administration believes that such proof would clearly justify military action to overthrow President Saddam Hussein.

Iraq, on the other hand, agreed to undergo inspections it clearly finds humiliating in the hope of galvanizing support. It believes that its only hope of avoiding war is to convince the rest of the world that its weapons development is over, and that other nations will press for the lifting of sanctions imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.

So the Iraqis, while increasingly testy about the inspections, work assiduously to avoid the constant confrontations that marked the previous round of inspections, from 1991 to 1998. They also try to undermine confidence in the entire process.

General Amin said today that he thought that the chemical inspection team from the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission was just flexing its muscles in preventing thousands of people from leaving the site.

''They wanted to exercise their maximum intrusiveness, the toughest implementation possible of Resolution 1441,'' he said.

But he said Iraq did not want to complain and did not even try to get the ambassador out. The general, who usually appears at weekly news conferences in professorial tweeds, drove himself out of the complex in a white Toyota Avalon, wearing fatigues with the eagle of his rank on the epaulets.

''I didn't want to object to the behavior of the inspection team so as not to give them a pretext to say that Iraq is trying to put obstacles in front of the inspections,'' he said, stepping out of his car to talk to reporters.

The Bush administration has warned that any resistance on the part of the Iraqis will be considered a ''material breach'' of the United Nations resolution and possible justification for an attack.

A team of 21 inspectors went to the research campus today, 14 to carry out inspections and 7 to run security. The complex houses a variety of research organizations including Iraq's space agency, which is trying to build a satellite but has also been consulted on weapons systems. Branches of various other government organizations on the campus include the Military Industrialization Organization, the Ministry of Industry and the Ministry of Trade.

United Nations spokesmen said the entire site, which has some 50 buildings, had been frozen to try to make an overall assessment of how the research facilities might be allied. Separate organizations at the site have been subjected to numerous inspections previously, both in the last month and in the 1990's. The inspectors today entered every major building except the liaison office.

''They froze the entire site because they wanted to do an overall technical assessment of its capabilities, and not just pinpoint here and there,'' said Ewen Buchanan, the inspection commission spokesman, reached by telephone in New York.

He said the United Nations team had decided to keep thousands of workers there after consulting with the Iraqi minders, the two sides determining it was better to keep everyone there to get answers to any pending questions rather than have to return another day if someone essential had left.

Hiro Ueki, the inspection commission spokesman in Baghdad, said the inspectors had been unaware that the United Nations ambassador was in the complex.

He said anyone who wanted to leave could as long as they agreed to be searched first. Security Council Resolution 1441 gives the inspectors sweeping powers to prevent movement out of a site to avoid the removal of anything. Reports were rife during inspections in the 1990's that teams were showing up at one entrance while trucks rumbled out another.

Freezing the complex created some striking scenes, with scores of Iraqi men and women trying to leave the area opening their plastic bags and briefcases to allow the inspectors to rummage through them. The interiors of cars trying to leave were photographed with a videocamera.

After 2 p.m. -- quitting time in Iraq -- thousands of employees were milling around the site waiting to go. After about 30 minutes, a group of women, some accompanied by small children who had evidently been in day care, approached the reporters at the gate to protest vociferously.

''Is this the kind of freedom the Americans are talking about?'' one woman shouted. ''Look at what they are doing to us.''

The most intense inspections today focused on Al Basil Chemical and Petroleum Research Institute, a government organization that helps develop things like antifreeze and engine lubricants from oil.

Khalid Mustapha, deputy director of the company, said the inspectors had walked through each of the 70 rooms in their main building, taking dust samples and asking questions about the work done there.
