
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PROOF; U.S. May Give The U.N. Data On Iraqi Labs
By James Dao
Jan. 31, 2003

In his presentation to the United Nations next week on Iraq's concealment of weapons, administration officials indicate, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will provide three major categories of intelligence: on Iraq's mobile biological weapons labs; on its purchase of materials for making chemical, biological and nuclear arms; and on its ties to terrorist groups.

In addition, two senior State Department officials told senators today that there was ''clear evidence'' that Iraq is hiding biological and chemical weapons, harassing weapons inspectors and harboring members of Al Qaeda.

One of the officials, Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage, said Mr. Powell was working ''feverishly'' to have photographs, communications interceptions and other intelligence relating to Iraq's weapons programs and ties to Al Qaeda declassified to make the administration's case more powerful. In particular, Mr. Powell is hoping to present convincing intelligence -- possibly satellite photos -- that Iraq has been hiding mobile biological weapons labs, Mr. Armitage told the Foreign Relations Committee.

Mr. Powell ''is going to be showing some new intelligence and some new information,'' Mr. Armitage said, adding, ''No one will be able to evade the absolute conclusion about Saddam Hussein's denial, deception, his absolute lack of willingness to show any sign of a disarmament motive in his mind.''

Other administration officials said that Mr. Powell would probably present intelligence, much of it gathered from detainees held at the Guantánamo Bay in Cuba, indicating that Qaeda members had sought training in chemical weapons in Iraq. Some intelligence officials have said they have been unable to corroborate the detainees' reports.

In a remarkably candid moment, Mr. Armitage, a blunt-spoken former Navy officer, also acknowledged that the administration had on occasion tried to build its case against Iraq on ambiguous intelligence, and he pledged that Mr. Powell would bring only the most compelling, clear-cut data available to the United Nations.

As an example of such ambiguous information, Democrats today cited the administration's assertion, repeated by President Bush in his State of the Union address, that Iraq had bought aluminum tubes to restart its nuclear weapons program. The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, has said the tubes can just as easily be used to build nonnuclear rockets.

''Clearly, there's a difference of opinion in the intelligence community'' on the purpose of the tubes, Mr. Armitage said in response to questions raised by Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, the committee's ranking Democrat.

''Perhaps we miscalculated,'' he said. ''I take your comments as a sign to, as we used to say in the Navy, 'Keep it simple, sailor,' go with your strong points.''

Administration officials have been trying to keep expectations about Mr. Powell's presentation next week from rising too high. While they say the presentation will be compelling, they have also said it will not contain any intelligence as definite as the dramatic satellite photographs of Soviet missiles in Cuba that Adlai E. Stevenson presented to the United Nations in 1962.

Instead, officials said today, the intelligence, some of it clearly incriminating, some more circumstantial, will represent the administration's attempt to ''fill in the blanks'' in the recent report to the United Nations by Hans Blix, the chief inspector for chemical and biological weapons.

A debate has persisted inside the administration over how much intelligence should be declassified for Mr. Powell's presentation. The information includes intercepted telephone conversations between Iraqi officials, photographs and accounts of defectors and detainees.

Administration officials have expressed concern not only that some of the intelligence is subject to varying, even contradictory, interpretations, but also that revealing it might compromise sources or help other countries learn about American spy satellites. Some officials also worry that if Mr. Powell discloses precisely what the United States knows about Iraqi missiles, the Iraqis will move them before the United States can destroy them in a war.

Previewing what Mr. Powell may present on Iraq's concealment efforts, Mr. Armitage told the committee that the administration had strong intelligence that Iraq maintains mobile labs for producing biological toxins, though it remains highly classified. ''I'd be delighted if they were in the desert,'' Mr. Armitage said, asserting that there, they could be easily spotted and destroyed. ''We believe they are hidden in one of these many tunnels or underground facilities, or garages.''

In the second category, Iraq's weapons purchases, Mr. Powell will focus on a pattern of buying materials that could be used for manufacturing biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, the officials said. The aluminum tubes fit into this pattern, they added, because even if not intended for a nuclear program, they could be used for building long-range rockets -- also a prohibited activity.

During the hearing John D. Negroponte, the American ambassador to the United Nations, raised particular concerns about Iraq's acquisition of 380 rocket engines, which had been imported in violation of United Nations sanctions.

''Iraq has casting chambers for solid-fuel missiles capable of ranges significantly greater than 150 kilometers and has imported other equipment, including 380 rocket engines,'' Mr. Negroponte told the senators. ''We definitely believe that they are intended for prohibited purposes.''

Mr. Powell will also present new information linking Al Qaeda to Mr. Hussein's government, the officials said. This third area could be the most contentious part of the administration's case. Many European diplomats have said that convincing data tying Mr. Hussein to Al Qaeda would make it easier for their governments to support a war. But they have also expressed strong skepticism that such evidence exists.

Today, Mr. Armitage told the senators, ''It's clear that Al Qaeda is harbored, to some extent, in Iraq -- that there is a presence in Iraq.''

One indication of that, he said, was the recent presence in Baghdad of a leading Qaeda chemical weapons expert, Abbu Mussab al-Zarqawi. Some intelligence officials think Mr. Zarqawi masterminded the October assassination of Laurence Foley, an American diplomat in Jordan.

Mr. Armitage also said Mr. Powell would probably present intelligence tying Al Qaeda to Ansar al-Islam, a radical Islamic group that operates in northern Iraq. Kurdish groups allied with the United States have said that 60 to 200 Qaeda soldiers recently trained in Ansar camps in northern Iraq.

But some officials have said many of those soldiers may have already fled the region. Many American intelligence officials contend there is little if any intelligence indicating a clear connection between Mr. Hussein and Ansar.
Correction: Feb. 5, 2003
An article on Friday about exhibits that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was preparing for the United Nations about Iraq's concealment of weapons misstated the source of 1962 photographs showing Soviet missiles in Cuba that Adlai E. Stevenson displayed to the United Nations in an episode that Bush administration officials called more dramatic than the current one. The pictures were from U-2 spy planes, not satellites.
