

The World; Politics Shapes the Battlefield in Iraq
By Steven R. Weisman
March 30, 2003

''HE that makes war without many mistakes has not made war very long.''

So said Napoleon, whose first military discovery was that deadly sprays of artillery-fired grapeshot were more effective than cannonballs in subduing the royalist mobs storming the Tuileries in Paris in 1795. It was, in its way, an early version of the ''shock and awe'' approach to war.

In Iraq, military experts predicted that intensive bombing at principal military installations, combined with a lightning quick thrust by a lean force to the gates of Baghdad, might cow the Iraqis into surrendering, ousting Saddam Hussein and welcoming coalition forces as liberators.

But the war in Iraq opened with a less than overwhelming force on the ground -- and, it turned out, a less than broadly applied bombing campaign from the air. Whether or not these decisions turn out to have been a mistake, one thing is clear: According to those participating in the decisions, both the original plan and the changes made to it were driven not by military tactics alone, but by the politics swirling around a war that is opposed and hated by much if not most of the world.

With the war now stalemated at least temporarily, some experts say the original plan cannot be judged to have failed for a simple reason -- it was not tried.

The bombing has been less than fully aggressive, because of fears of killing civilians and destroying wide swaths of the country, deepening international opposition to the war.

And the ground war has been hampered because Turkey did not accept its role as host of the northern front forces, again for political reasons. Its government was too weak in the face of antiwar feeling.

Military experts say President Bush and his military advisers now face a decision: whether to build up forces more rapidly and step up the bombing of Baghdad and other cities to bring the war to a more swift conclusion, even if that incurs greater wrath overseas, especially in Arab countries.

''If this war bogs down further, a lot of factors will come into play, and you can't divide the military from the political,'' said William E. Odom, former head of the National Security Agency and a retired lieutenant general.

''The dilemma is whether to kill more people in order to bring the war to a quick conclusion, making people angry abroad, or string the war out and risk losing support here at home.''

Almost everyone knows one of the most famous axioms about this dilemma, from Karl von Clausewitz: war is the extension of politics by other means.

Applied to Iraq, it raises the question of whether a war aimed at achieving political objectives -- ousting a regime and instilling an economically viable pro-Western democracy as a model for the region -- engages in tactics that undermine this very purpose.

Advisers to any modern president waging a war are likely to say it is a mistake to let politics interfere.

Look at what happened when President Lyndon B. Johnson himself selected bombing targets in Vietnam because he was afraid of waging a war so ruthless that it might outrage Americans and antagonize Russia and China, bringing them more directly into the fight.

A generation of generals concluded that the military had its hands tied in Vietnam, and thus lost the war, because of politics.

But others say that trying to separate political considerations from war is unrealistic. Johnson's restraint made sense in the context of the time, says Eliot A. Cohen, author of ''Supreme Command,'' a book about wartime leadership.

Johnson was haunted by the experience of President Harry S. Truman, who dismissed Gen. Douglas MacArthur for disobeying his orders and making a foray into North Korea that provoked the Chinese to intervene.

Now the inseparability of politics and war is on display again.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was one general who believed that politics had too much influence in Vietnam, and his so-called Powell Doctrine held that the United States should never again start a military enterprise without overwhelming force.

But that doctrine was challenged long before the current battle for Iraq. In 1990, for example, after Iraq invaded Kuwait, Mr. Powell, then chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, presented the first President George Bush and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney with a proposal to oust the Iraqis with a show of force substantially larger than was eventually used.

''I was not happy with the briefing,'' recalled Brent Scowcroft, then the national security adviser, in the memoirs he wrote with the first President Bush. ''It sounded unenthusiastic, delivered by people who didn't want to do the job.''

In 1991, Mr. Cheney and his aides devised a lightning strike at Iraqi troops from the west. It was generally regarded as a military success despite the decision, stemming from political constraints, to stop, letting large numbers of Iraqi Republican Guards escape and leaving Saddam Hussein in power.

Similarly, in the current war, Vice President Cheney and his longtime friend, Donald H. Rumsfeld, the defense secretary, rejected military plans for a larger force to oust Mr. Hussein. Instead, they settled on a modest initial force, combined with precision bombing, that would be a ''rolling start,'' paving the way for greater forces if needed.

Their decision to use a ground force less than half the size of the coalition forces in 1991 was made for several reasons, administration officials say.

First, those officials said, Mr. Rumsfeld again thought the generals' call for overwhelming force reflected uneasiness about the war itself. Second, he wanted to prove that a newly transformed armed force, relying on technology and creative tactics, could work better than a blunderbuss approach.

But third, some in the administration say, was a concern at the Pentagon that the war would be a hard sell to the public and the world if it would take an enormous force.

IT is far too early to say whether that view was right or wrong.

But what no one counted on was how the Iraqis would apply their own military strategy dictated by politics.

Instead of destroying their own country and torching oil fields to slow down the coalition forces' advance, they left them largely intact in an effort to convince the world that they were innocent victims.

The Iraqis surprised American commanders by keeping some of their special forces in the south to attack from the rear, hoping to slow the attack, create an impasse and inspire frightened Middle East nations to demand a cease-fire.

''What to the Americans was shock and awe designed to force them into capitulation has become shocking and appalling to much of the world that's looking at it,'' said John W. Dower, a historian of World War II.

While the United States was planning its spectacular bombing campaign, in other words, the Iraqis were planning a campaign that looked as if it was based on Clausewitz.
