

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD'S VIEW; War Looms but God Is With Us, Hussein Tells Iraqis
By John F. Burns
Oct. 18, 2002

President Saddam Hussein warned Iraqis today that they might have to endure war with the United States, but he assured them that Divine Providence would ensure their victory.

''If Allah Almighty, in his great wisdom and for reasons beyond our comprehension, decides to put you again to the test of fighting on a large scale, then the Almighty, the nation and history will expect you to deliver an effective stand,'' Mr. Hussein said, according to an official translation of his Arabic text.

''Afterward,'' he continued, ''the enemy will fall on his face, despised, condemned and defeated, while your banner, the banner of God Is Great, will continue to fly high on its nest, dignified and honorable.''

His statements came in a rambling 40-minute speech at an inaugural ceremony marking his new seven-year term as Iraq's president.

A vote held on Tuesday, with Mr. Hussein as the only contestant, was stage-managed as a means of answering President Bush's descriptions of Mr. Hussein as a murdering dictator, and as a man who has imposed a reign of fear and terror on his own people and his region. Officials said on Wednesday that 100 percent of the 11.4 million voters had cast ballots for Mr. Hussein.

If the referendum's result strained credulity, even by the standards of the overwhelming election landslides that the Arab world's autocratic leaders commonly claim for themselves, Mr. Hussein's speech contained more surprises.

Although officials billed the speech as an occasion for the Iraqi leader to set out his policies on the confrontation with the United States, what Mr. Hussein delivered was more of a homily, replete with frequent quotations from the Koran, than an attempt to address the issues underlying the current crisis.

He made no mention of the issues that President Bush has identified as justifying a possible American military action to overthrow him: Iraq's alleged drive to develop nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and its alleged contacts with Al Qaeda.

Nor did Mr. Hussein make any direct reference to Mr. Bush, who is vilified daily by other Iraqi leaders, or to the role played in the crisis by Britain, which has allied itself closely with the United States in threatening military action.

The speech made for an odd contrast with the occasion. In the wake of the referendum, Mr. Hussein appears to be at the pinnacle of his power -- so unchallengeable after 23 years of absolute authority that his small inner circle of loyalists saw no problem in declaring a referendum result that appeared to have virtually no chance of being taken at face value even among countries that have backed Baghdad in its current showdown with Washington.

That the Iraqi leadership took its lead from Mr. Hussein seemed clear when he said in his speech today that the referendum result was ''visual and tangible'' evidence of ''the road of free expression'' in Iraq.

''The people have also shown the level of closeness reached in the relationship between them and their leadership,'' Mr. Hussein said.

Nothing at the ceremony in the National Assembly, Iraq's rubber-stamp Parliament, would have done anything to undermine the Iraqi leader's sense of himself as a man divinely entrusted to lead his nation's 22 million people.

His arrival at the hall, the formal inauguration, during which he unsheathed a ceremonial sword, and his speech itself were interrupted by men and women in the audience leaping to their feet and shouting hoarse choruses and verses in his praise.

Mr. Hussein, looking heavier than in years past, with gray flecking his mustache, watched impassively as the encomiums flowed, gesturing now and then to still the praises.

The audience was a testament to the aging oligarchy around Mr. Hussein, mostly drawn from the ranks of the Revolutionary Command Council, the elite group that holds all important power, as well as from Parliament and the cabinet.

On several occasions the television cameras focused on a younger man in his early 30's, stone-faced, who would be the favored candidate to succeed Mr. Hussein if he died: his younger son, Qusay, who holds key posts in the state security system.

The praises for Mr. Hussein followed the patterns set by voters across the country at the polls on Tuesday. ''With our blood, with our souls, we sacrifice ourselves to you, Saddam,'' the audience chanted rhythmically, again and again.

A man in Bedouin clothes, his voice breaking and hoarse, shouted, ''Saddam, with your towering strength you have shaken America to a standstill.''

A man who identified himself as a Kurd -- a member of an ethnic group that has been a target of violent crackdowns under Mr. Hussein -- shouted: ''We will remain the sword in your hands. You are our leader, and the leader of the Arab nation.''

But after the buildup, Mr. Hussein appeared oddly subdued. Reading in a monotone from a large-lettered text that spared him from using spectacles, he avoided any direct reference to the issues of weapons and terrorism that have placed all of Iraq, and the Middle East, on edge.

A possible reason, diplomats said, was that the Iraqi leader was reluctant to say anything that might complicate matters for the countries that have so far protected Iraq from any harsh new United Nations resolutions on weapons inspections: France and Russia.

In the most substantive passage of the speech, Mr. Hussein referred to ''the bloody events of September 2001,'' saying the United States had shunned calls from leaders around the world, including himself, to ''identify the causes'' of the attacks and address them.

Instead, he said, Washington had chosen the path of war. Quoting the Koran, he went on: ''As the Almighty says, 'Thou canst not make the dead listen, nor canst thou cause the deaf to hear the call.' ''

''The Americans did not hear the call,'' he said. ''They found it easier to take the road of blood and violence.'' He added: ''The road of blood can only lead to more blood. We have learned this fact from our elders in the countryside. We used to hear them say it many years ago, despite their simple life of limited education. The road of blood takes you to more blood, and he who tries to shed the blood of others must expect his blood to be spilled.''

Mr. Hussein, who has long posed as the Arab world's most militant opponent of Israel, returned repeatedly to the theme of ''Zionist'' influence on the policies of the United States.

''American administrations have for long produced the games of the Zionist lobby in the United States,'' he said. ''They cannot see the facts as they are, and even if they did see the facts as they were, they would not be able to act according to their own interpretation, but only according to the interests of the Zionist lobby and the Zionist entity which occupies Palestine.''