

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAN FRONTIER; Across Iraq's Border, A Land Haunted by War
By Elaine Sciolino
Feb. 7, 2003

The feeling of death lingers on this parched desert plain two miles from the Iraqi border, many years after the fighting ended.

The bodies were buried long ago, but the twisted remains of Iraqi tanks and armored personnel carriers dug deep in the cracked earth stand as reminders of an eight-year war between Iran and Iraq that left the border unchanged but cost between 600,000 and a million lives.

It was in this southwest corner of Iran that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq used chemical weapons against Iranian soldiers and Iran sent human waves of teenage martyrs to die in the name of Islam.

The Islamic Republic is building a marble-floored war memorial and museum here to replace the makeshift museum of corrugated metal where photos of the dead Iranian soldiers hang. One photo shows a bloody, severed head.

A sign at the entrance reads, ''Dear pilgrims, have a good pilgrimage,'' but there are more construction workers than visitors these days.

People in this region have a unique perspective on the war that the United States seems determined to fight.

While the official line in Tehran is to oppose an American-led war against Iraq, here the argument is different: only when Mr. Hussein is overthrown will Khuzistan Province be secure enough to persuade businesses and individuals to invest in an economically depressed area that wants to be made whole again.

''Of course war brings misery,'' said a heavyset merchant in the Indian Spice Shop as he blended curries for stews, soups and kabobs. ''But it would be wonderful if there's a war and Saddam disappears.''

His partner agreed, ''Yes, it would be good to get rid of that regime no matter what.''

An old man chimed in: ''What are you talking about? This whole thing is about Iran, not Iraq. The Americans want to surround Iran. They are already doing it. Even the son of the shah wants to come back and claim the monarchy.''

But still, he added, war would be a ''positive development.''

An engineer from nearby Ahwaz said afterward that Mr. Hussein was a useful scapegoat for the problems of the Islamic Republic.

''If we don't want to be too pessimistic about our own government, we say the problem is Saddam,'' he said as he gave a foreign guest a drive around the area. Then he refined his argument, adding that the problem is indeed Mr. Hussein.

''Saddam is like a wild animal,'' he continued. ''We lost everything when Saddam came. No one can predict what he will do when he's disturbed in his lair.''

Khuzistan Province had oil and a large Arabic-speaking population. Mr. Hussein believed that the area was rightfully his, just as he believed that Kuwait belonged to him when he invaded that country a decade later.

It was in this part of Iran that Mr. Hussein mounted a huge air and ground assault on the first day of his invasion in 1980, attacking Abadan's huge oil-refining center, the nearby port city of Khorramshahr, the provincial capital, Ahwaz, and the military installations in the area. The second day he sent his divisions deep into Iran.

Much of the area has never been rebuilt, and many of the inhabitants who did not flee have never recovered economically or psychologically. So the feelings toward the Iraqi leader are a blend of hatred and fear.

Yet a kind of normalcy prevails. The shops in Abadan, Ahwaz and Khorramshahr are filled with people buying and selling. Families stroll along the fetid Karun River, and boys fish for small white fish in the salt marshes that once were filled with bloated corpses.

The posters and paintings glorifying the martyrs of the Iran-Iraq war are more numerous here than in other areas of Iran. But people here have little confidence that the government in faraway Tehran will come to their rescue if Mr. Hussein decides to avenge an American invasion by turning against Iran. Clerics are less visible than in many other parts of Iran.

An estimated 200,000 Iraqi refugees live in camps along the border or in poverty outside the refugee system. The United Nations high commissioner for refugees, Ruud Lubbers, said about 300,000 refugees would be expected to flee to Iran in case of a new war.

''We are afraid that he may open the borders and overrun us with refugees or may gas us again with chemical gases,'' a businessman said of Mr. Hussein. ''But we will not go to war again.''

The desire to see the Iraqi leader fall coincides with a strong distrust of the the United States and its allies. Much of the West took Iraq's side after it invaded Iran, and during the war armed it with the sophisticated arms and chemicals that kept Iran at bay. In the beginning the main reason was Iran's seizure of the American Embassy in Tehran in 1979.

After the invasion, the United States merely cautioned that it ''could not condone'' Iraq's seizure of Khuzistan. It took the United Nations more than a week to pass a weak resolution that urged the combatants to refrain from the use of force and accept appropriate mediation.

After the Iranians retook Khorramshahr in one of the fiercest battles since World War II, it was another six years before Iran abandoned its effort to overthrow Mr. Hussein. Much of the landscape that surrounds Khorramshahr -- renamed Khuninshahr or city of blood, during the war -- looks the way it did during the war. Deep trenches, gun pits and earthen walls reminiscent of World War I have permanently reshaped the landscape.

A war museum boasts exhibits designed to prove Iran's conviction that this was a holy war against blasphemy. Among the possessions of the dead Iranians are copies of the Koran and handwritten poems about the glories of sacrifice. The Iraqis, by contrast, took playing cards, cigarettes and whiskey to war.

Some of the hatred of Mr. Hussein here stems from a racist-tinged animosity between ethnic Arabs and ethnic Iranians inside Iran, and between Iraqis and Iranians in general.

The war not only attracted Iraqi refugees to the cities, but also ethnic Arabs and other tribesman from their villages, and Iranians of all classes blame the newcomers for a rise in crime.

The primary reason that Iranians here are unlikely to welcome their Iraqi brothers if there is a war is economic.

''The economy is dead,'' said an electrical technician in Khorramshahr who works for the government and earns the equivalent of $200 a month. ''People are not afraid of war. They're afraid of poverty. Even though the Iraqis are Muslims and we are Muslims, refugees will make things even worse.''

But the businessman explained: ''There's a historic animosity that goes back between the Arabs and the Persians. Saddam has always despised the Persians, and we were always afraid what he would do to us.''
