

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WHITE HOUSE; U.S. Resisting Calls For a 2nd U.N. Vote On a War With Iraq
By Richard W. Stevenson and David E. Sanger
Jan. 16, 2003

The Bush administration resisted calls by other nations today that it secure the explicit blessing of the United Nations Security Council before going to war with Iraq. The White House further suggested that it could decide in favor of military action even if weapons inspectors do not turn up concrete new evidence against Saddam Hussein.

A day after President Bush warned that ''time is running out'' on Mr. Hussein, a senior administration official said the timetable for a decision about war would be ''driven by events.'' Those include a report to be submitted by the United Nations weapons inspectors on Jan. 27 and evidence that Mr. Hussein is truly complying with the United Nations demand that he give up any weapons of mass destruction.

In another sign of the growing frustration with what the White House views as stalling and evasion by Iraq, the official said that Mr. Hussein was intimidating his scientists into refusing to travel outside of Iraq for interviews about Baghdad's weapons programs. Iraq has said that none of its scientists want to go outside the country for interviews.

''From that kind of regime, that's called marching orders,'' the official said.

Clearly intent on not allowing the weapons inspections to continue for months without a decision on confronting Mr. Hussein, the administration said it would try to head off pressure from some nations to work according to a timetable established under a 1999 United Nations resolution that would require the inspectors to report again in late March.

The resolution adopted in November, No. 1441, ''lays out a more intensive rhythm for inspections and a set of expectations meant to test Saddam Hussein's readiness to disarm peacefully,'' said the senior official. ''It is an immediate test.''

Further raising the pressure on Mr. Hussein, officials said the United States has asked NATO to help in the event of a war, in part by protecting Turkey against attack. Officials also disclosed that the United States has sent Patriot antimissile systems and 600 troops to Israel to strengthen its defenses against an Iraqi missile attack.

As it confronted pressure from other countries to slow the pace of events and for concrete evidence that Iraq is hiding chemical and biological weapons and seeking to build or acquire nuclear weapons, the White House said Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, the closest ally of the United States, would meet with Mr. Bush at Camp David on Jan. 31.

Their meeting is to be held four days after the United Nations inspectors submit their report, a step administration officials have said will be important in Mr. Bush's deliberations about whether to take military action. Their meeting will also come three days after Mr. Bush is expected to deliver his State of the Union address, an opportunity for him to make his case against Iraq to the nation and the world.

But even as administration officials reiterated their view that the onus is on Mr. Hussein to show that he is complying with the United Nations resolution, the United States came under pressure from other nations not to act without another Security Council resolution.

In Moscow, the Russian foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, said that ''a unilateral military operation against Baghdad that is not sanctioned by the U.N. Security Council is capable only of worsening the already difficult situation in the region,'' according to the Interfax news agency.

Mr. Ivanov said war without the approval of the Security Council ''would lead to unpredictable consequences for international peace and stability, including damage to the interests of the global struggle against terrorism.''

Canada's Prime Minister, Jean Chrétien, said at a news conference in Ottawa that the world ''must speak and act through the U.N. Security Council,'' and that, within reason, the weapons inspectors should have more time if they need it. He declined to answer when asked whether Canada would participate if the United States led a military action without further authorization from the United Nations.

Faced with criticism from within his own Labor Party today over the possibility of joining the United States in a war without a new United Nations resolution, Mr. Blair said, ''Of course we all want a second U.N. resolution. I believe we will get one.''

But he added, ''Where there is an unreasonable veto put down, we will not rule out action.'' Asked today whether the United States would seek another resolution from the United Nations if Mr. Bush decides to go to war, Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said Mr. Bush had promised to consult with the Security Council and its members but had left open the option of acting against Iraq without a new resolution.

''The president will continue to work with other nations on this matter,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''And many nations have already weighed in and said they don't think a second resolution is necessary. And whether someone thinks a second resolution is necessary, or whether a different nation says a resolution is not necessary, the president will continue to work with one and all to build a coalition of the willing.''

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld turned up the pressure on the United Nations, saying that failure to support action against Iraq would leave the organization without credibility and at risk of collapsing, as the League of Nations effectively did in the 1930's.

At the time, Mr. Rumsfeld noted, Canada's Prime Minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King, declared, ''Collective bluffing cannot bring about collective security.''

In a spirited news conference, Mr. Rumsfeld addressed the apparent discrepancy between the desire of some nations for a ''smoking gun'' in Iraq and the position of the United States that failure by Mr. Hussein to cooperate fully with the weapons inspectors could itself provide critical weight to the case for war.

Mr. Rumsfeld dismissed calls to withhold military action until international inspections found hard evidence of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, arguing that inspections are inherently ineffective when the host country is uncooperative.

He said that the Iraqi government has proved very skilled in denial and deception tactics, and cited without details incidents in the last two months in which Baghdad he said concealed chemical or biological weapons from the inspectors.

He said American intelligence analysts have concluded that Iraq has produced chemical and biological weapons, and is actively pursuing development of nuclear weapons. Mr. Rumsfeld declined to provide specific evidence and warned, as he and other administration officials have since Sept. 11, 2001, that awaiting firm proof that a terrorist group or rogue nation possesses weapons of mass destruction could prove cataclysmic.

''In the case of Iraq, the task is to connect the dots before there's a smoking gun,'' he said. ''If there's a smoking gun, and it involves weapons of mass destruction, it is a lot of people dead, not 3,000, but multiples of that.''
