

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE U.N. TEAMS; Iraq Inspectors Call Their Jobs Far From Over
By Julia Preston With Ian Fisher
Jan. 27, 2003

While the Bush administration appears close to declaring that weapons inspections in Iraq have ended in failure, United Nations inspectors say their work is just getting started.

The dispute that has divided the United States from other permanent powers on the Security Council -- including France, Russia and China -- was set off by the issue of timing: Should the inspections continue for weeks or perhaps months, as the Europeans and others contend, or have they already produced enough results for the Council to conclude they have failed, as the United States insists?

What underlies the debate are different assessments of Iraq's weapons capabilities, with the United States asserting, without providing complete evidence, that Iraq is hiding weapons of mass destruction.

To many inspectors, it is too early to make any evaluation of their work. ''We obviously need more time,'' said an official of the team inspecting nuclear facilities. ''We are just reaching a fully operational level. You can't expect us to have great progress or results in only two months.''

The chief inspectors, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, will update the Council on Monday regarding the first 60 days of their work, fulfilling a requirement of Resolution 1441, on which the inspections are based. They will criticize Iraq for withholding important information and blocking aerial reconnaissance flights, United Nations officials said, but they will also say they need more time to produce conclusive results.

The arms chiefs have worked to get their two teams under way at top speed, beating several deadlines in Council resolutions. They started work in Iraq on Nov. 27 with 17 inspectors, and now have about 100 chemical, biological and missile experts for Mr. Blix's group and about a dozen nuclear inspectors for Mr. ElBaradei's.

Mr. Blix's team is not yet up to full force, with 60 more experts currently in training in Vienna, said Hiro Ueki, the spokesman in Baghdad for the inspectors. The inspectors' fleet of eight helicopters, key to conducting surprise visits to outlying sites, began flying in the first week of January.

In two months, the inspectors have been to about 400 sites. But most of these visits were to check on the situation at sites inspectors had investigated before December 1998, the last time inspectors were able to work before they were barred by Iraq for four years.

Mr. Ueki said the inspectors had not yet seen all the sites that Iraq has publicly declared as arms-related. ''So naturally we need more time for that,'' he said.

''We are aware of the larger political picture,'' he added. ''But we have a very technical job to do on the ground -- and all the inspectors are experts in various fields. We want to do the job right.''

The inspectors' job has been complicated by ambivalence in the Bush administration, United Nations officials said. American intelligence officials, wary of leaks to Iraq, decided only in late December to share higher quality information with the inspection teams about what sites to visit and which Iraqi arms experts to interview. Even Mr. Blix, normally carefully diplomatic, became exasperated by the wait, telling reporters he felt that American officials were ''librarians who did not want to lend out the books.''

The discovery by inspectors on Jan. 16 of classified documents in the home of an Iraqi scientist was a result, in part, of the improved intelligence, United Nations officials and diplomats said.

But Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz indicated in a speech on Thursday that the administration still did not entirely trust the inspectors' systems for keeping data secret. He said the administration anticipates that Iraq will use ''cyber-intrusions to steal inspection methods, criteria and findings'' from the inspectors' computers. Some administration officials said last week that a leak had allowed Iraq to ''clean up'' one site the inspectors planned to visit.

Administration officials and Mr. Blix also differed over interviews with Iraqi weapons experts. While administration officials insisted that the inspectors must conduct interviews outside Iraq, Mr. Blix argued that confidential interviews in the country might be less conspicuous and more productive. The point has become moot: so far the Iraqi authorities have not encouraged their weapons experts to consent to interviews without government officials present, so no scientist has agreed to a private meeting.

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei have said their work is hampered by major omissions in Iraq's 12,000-page arms declaration. Mr. Blix noted that thousands of chemical warheads remained unaccounted for and that Iraq had provided no new evidence to prove that it destroyed large stocks of anthrax and the chemical agent VX that it had before 1998.

The weapons chiefs have strived to maintain their impartiality and to convince officials in Baghdad that they are making a professional and good-faith effort to do their jobs.

Officials in Washington were alarmed by a 10-point joint statement that Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei signed with Iraqi officials on Jan. 20, after two days of visits in Baghdad. Iraq agreed to urge scientists to consent to private interviews and promised to investigate 13 empty chemical warheads that inspectors stumbled on last week.

A senior administration official said Iraq had merely agreed again to do what it was already required to do under Resolution 1441. The official said the inspectors fell ''into the Iraqi trap.''

In Baghdad today, in a familiar routine, the first white four-wheel drive vehicles carrying inspectors drove off from a United Nations compound around 8:20 a.m., with half a dozen television camera crews following. Around a corner, the convoy stopped for another four-wheel drive vehicle filled with Iraqi officials who monitor the inspections, and headed north through early morning traffic.

Half an hour later, they arrived at a missile plant on the northern outskirts of Baghdad. The gates opened, revealing a portrait of President Saddam Hussein, smiling in a turban. On an outside wall was neatly written: ''Down U.S.A.''

The inspection was a previously planned visit to the Karama missile plant, opened in late 1990, where Iraq has been developing the Samoud missile since 1994, according to the site manager, Ali Auwaied, 50. In their fourth visit since December, the inspectors were trying to determine if the missile conforms to United Nations limits by having a range of no more than 150 kilometers.

''It's upsetting,'' Mr. Auwaied said after the inspectors left, ''but we try our best not to be upset, not to be angry, to discuss the issues as quietly as possible, to answer them that we haven't anything to hide.''

Iraqi officials say the Bush administration has no proof that Iraq has any prohibited weapons. They are increasingly doubtful that the inspections will ever satisfy the United States. ''We have been doing everything we have been asked to do and we got nowhere,'' said Gen. Amir al-Saadi, Iraq's top science adviser.
