

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Shift Toward the U.S. Stand On Iraq Is Noted in Council
By Julia Preston
Nov. 1, 2002


Seven long weeks into negotiations in the Security Council over a resolution to disarm Iraq, there has been a shift this week toward the United States and British draft proposal for aggressive weapons inspections backed by a clear threat of war, according to Council diplomats representing the United States and some nonpermanent members.

France and Russia, both permanent members, are still demanding a second vote based on United Nations arms inspections before authorizing military force. But indications from the two chief United Nations weapons inspectors that they are comfortable with the strong inspections plan proposed in the draft helped persuade nonpermanent Council nations that the proposal was not far off the mark.

Ireland, Mauritius and Cameroon reacted more favorably than American officials anticipated, United States officials said.

In closed Council sessions since Monday on the American and British draft, at least seven nonpermanent members indicated that they could support it, the diplomats said, giving the United States new confidence that the measure has the nine votes needed to pass.


With neither France, Russia nor China threatening to veto, American officials said today that they were preparing to put the resolution to a vote next week.

The administration stayed with the talks longer than many countries expected after President Bush opened his campaign against Iraq here in September warning the United Nations that it was becoming obsolete. With Secretary of State Colin L. Powell personally steering the globe-spanning negotiations, and Mr. Bush himself frequently picking up the phone, several envoys from nonpermanent member nations said the Council had been persuaded that a skeptical administration gave multilateralism a fair try.

For weeks France and other permanent Council powers seemed to be talking a loner American administration back from an impulsive war against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that could bring chaos to the Middle East.

But as France and Russia sat unmoving on their positions, they ran the risk of sounding more concerned about protecting their power on the Council than convincing Mr. Hussein that United Nations arms inspections will be his last chance to avoid war, diplomatic analysts said.

''That's the French way,'' said Richard C. Holbrooke, the former United States ambassador to the United Nations. ''It is the classic play out of the Charles de Gaulle playbook: hold out to the end, get more leverage.''

To be sure, its allies' opposition has brought the Bush administration a long way from its opening bid. In August, when Vice President Dick Cheney announced that Washington was gearing up for war with Iraq, he dismissed United Nations weapons inspections as dangerously ineffectual.

In its first draft of the resolution, the United States offered an arms inspections plan that many Council diplomats judged too intrusive for Iraq to accept. Its call for ''all necessary means'' to make Iraq disarm, regardless of the progress of the inspections, was broadly rejected.

After revisions, the current draft sets up an arms inspection plan that requires Iraq to give the inspectors immediate access to any site. Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, the chiefs of the United Nations inspections teams, welcomed most of the strong provisions in the draft this week, persuading Council nations that it was not so far off after all.

In meetings Wednesday with the chief inspectors, Mr. Bush promised to help them with American intelligence data, and administration officials stressed that they wanted to see the inspections work.

Recently American diplomats have assured the Council that they do not intend to take the resolution and run into battle. They said they embraced the hope widely shared here that Mr. Hussein will give up his illegal weapons to the inspectors so war can be averted.

''This resolution is not an attempt by the United States to seek an excuse for going to war,'' James B. Cunningham, the deputy representative, told the Council. ''It is an attempt to send a clear message to Iraq and to get a good inspection regime under way.''

French officials distrust Washington's compromises. They argue that a phrase in the draft resolution citing Iraq's ''material breach'' of its past obligations could be used by the United States to justify unilateral war.

''We don't want any ambiguities,'' a senior French diplomat said. But international lawyers said the draft resolution presents an accurate statement of legal facts.

''We have the right to use force because there has clearly been a material breach'' of past Council resolutions by Iraq, said Richard N. Gardner, a professor of international law at Columbia University. ''No administration is going to allow the French to take away from us a right we clearly have.''

Requiring a second vote, said Thomas M. Franck, professor emeritus of law at New York University, ''would irredeemably weaken the resolution.''

''The inspectors become hostages if you have to go back to the Council for a vote where there could be a veto,'' he said.

A number of council nations supported France's efforts to clarify the meaning of clauses in the draft that could refer to military force. American and French diplomats, sensing that a compromise between them could still be reached, worked hard to find the language.

If France, Russia or China abstain in the vote on the resolution, and it is adopted mainly with votes from nonpermanent nations, the measure would still have legal force, but would not carry the same political weight.

Despite good relations between Mr. Bush and the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, Moscow has been the most unbending in the negotiations. An alternative resolution it proposed informally neither strengthens the weapons inspection plan nor threatens force if Iraq fails to comply. Russia remained deeply reluctant to invite a new military conflict in Iraq, its backyard.

Russian officials insisted that the threat from Iraq's weapons was not immediate.

''Do you have any new information linking Iraq to terrorism?'' the Russian ambassador, Sergey Lavrov, asked reporters here this week. ''Neither do we.''

British officials ran interference between the feuding permanent powers. London came up with the idea of revising the draft to allow for the possibility, but not the requirement, of a second Council vote.

''Britain is committed to a two-stage process,'' Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British ambassador, has said.

Administration officials said their bottom line was that they would not allow the Council to limit Washington's scope of action. Mr. Bush, they note, already has authority from the Congress to lead a military assault.

But the Security Council is waiting to see if the Bush administration merely softened its tactics for this negotiation, or whether it changed its goals, opening the possibility that Mr. Hussein could stay in power if he gives up all his illegal weapons.

''We will know in time if this was wonderful Kissingerian verbal acrobatics,'' Mr. Holbrooke said, ''or whether sometime in this process we moved away from a military change'' of the Iraqi regime.
