

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IN BAGHDAD; IRAQ SEEKS TALKS TO SAVE ITS STOCK OF BARRED MISSILES
By Neil MacFarquhar
Feb. 24, 2003

Iraq publicly held out the hope today that technical talks with United Nations weapons experts might stave off the forced destruction of its most potent short-range missiles. But the country's officials appeared to be bowing toward the inevitable by playing down the importance of those weapons in defending the country against a United States invasion.

Iraq's ambiguous reaction to a United Nations demand made on Friday for the destruction of the missiles came as diplomatic maneuvering intensified ahead of a Security Council resolution to be submitted by the United States and Britain. The resolution is expected to declare that Iraq is not in compliance with orders to disarm and would face military force.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, visiting Beijing, was expected to press China not to oppose the new resolution, which a Security Council diplomat said could be introduced as early as Monday. France bluntly demanded that Iraq comply with the United Nations order to destroy the missiles. And Russia sent a former prime minister, Yevgeny Primakov, an old friend of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, to Baghdad. The nature of that mission was not disclosed.

China, France and Russia, which have opposed war to disarm Iraq, are permanent members of the Security Council, giving them veto power over United Nations resolutions. If Iraq were to reject the demand that it begin destroying its entire stock of Al Samoud 2 short-range missiles by March 1, that could help the Bush administration win sympathy for a new Security Council resolution authorizing force.

Elsewhere, Turkey's foreign minister said his country's Parliament would probably vote on Tuesday on whether to allow American combat troops to use its territory as a base for an Iraq invasion. [Page A7.]

In Iraq's first public reaction to the demand for the missile destruction, Lt. Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, the top liaison officer with the inspectors, said at a news conference here that Baghdad was still studying it.

''We hope that this issue will be resolved without interference from the Americans and the British,'' he said. ''I believe that we will be able to resolve this issue without any intervention by those with evil intentions.'' He noted that the missiles had no connection with the United Nations operation here to find Iraqi weapons of mass destruction, which his government contends do not exist.

The general said that Iraq had proposed talks on the missiles before the Friday directive from Hans Blix, the chief inspector, to destroy them, but that Iraq had yet to receive a response. Ewen Buchanan, the spokesman for Mr. Blix's inspectors, said the letter demanding the destruction of the weapons and their components was the response.

Kofi Annan, the secretary general of the United Nations, endorsed the demand, telling reporters in Turkey, ''I am confident they will destroy the weapons.''

Behind the focus on the missiles, Iraqi diplomatic maneuvering continued around the region. Iraq requested that a summit meeting of Arab leaders due to convene on March 1 in Cairo be postponed at least two weeks, apparently wary that the Arab states allied with Washington would use it to increase the pressure on Baghdad.

The official Iraqi News Agency quoted Mr. Hussein as describing President Bush as lacking the gallantry needed to take on Iraq. ''The Iraqis are angered by the behavior of their enemy, who has not kept within the minimum of manhood and chivalry,'' it quoted him as telling a visiting delegation. ''Tell your brothers that the Americans can destroy buildings and facilities, but they will fail to humiliate Iraq.''

Diplomats here believe that Iraq will follow practically any request made by Mr. Blix in hopes of giving him the tools to help stave off a United States attack. His demand that the Iraqis destroy their missiles and associated equipment seemed to present them with an opportunity to enhance Mr. Blix's assessment of their cooperation with disarmament.

General Amin seemed to set the stage for writing off the missiles, calling them an experimental weapon. He did not say how many Al Samoud 2 missiles Iraq possessed, but it is believed to be around 100.

Destruction of the missiles ''would affect our fighting capabilities, but it would not finish them or affect them greatly,'' he said. ''This missile represents only one aspect of our defensive capabilities. We have comprehensive capabilities.''

President Bush said on Saturday that even if Iraq agreed to destroy all of its prohibited missiles, they were ''just the tip of the iceberg'' in its illegal arsenal.

The missiles were ordered destroyed because they exceeded the 92-mile range limit established under the cease-fire terms of the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Mr. Blix's March 1 deadline for their destruction coincides with his next report to the Security Council on Iraq's compliance.

The Iraqi general said there was no need for such a resolution because Iraq was cooperating with the weapons inspectors in every conceivable way. He said he could only surmise that criticism to the contrary just meant that the inspectors were not working fast enough.

The general noted that Iraq had begun to excavate sites where it claims to have destroyed nerve agents and biological weapons. The Iraqis say new technology in analyzing the soil will allow weapons inspectors to verify its assertion that it literally poured its stocks of VX nerve gas and anthrax into the ground in 1991.

A team of United Nations experts is due to discuss the matter here next Sunday. Lingering questions about the fate of various chemical weapons, nerve agents, missiles and other war matériel have fed suspicions that Iraq is still hoarding such weapons.

In addition, a French Mirage jet fighter to be deployed within days and low-flying German drones are due join the U-2 spy planes that started this week to add to the inspector's air surveillance abilities.

WHAT'S NEXT

Diplomacy, Discussions and a Deadline This Week

FEB. 24-28

The United States and Britain plan to present the Security Council with a new resolution on Iraq.

TODAY

Meeting of Unmovic Board of Commissioners, led by Hans Blix, at United Nations headquarters, to discuss work plan.

TOMORROW

President Bush to meet with Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, prime minister of Bulgaria, a Security Council member.

Meeting of Unmovic board to be completed.

Turkey expected to vote on accepting U.S. troops.

WEDNESDAY

British Parliament will debate the Iraq issue.

President Bush to meet with Heydar Aliyev, president of Azerbaijan, in the White House.

THURSDAY

President Bush to meet with Hamid Karzai, president of Afghanistan, in the White House.

SATURDAY

Report from Mr. Blix on progress of weapons inspections due.

Mr. Blix's deadline for Iraq to begin destroying banned missile components.

Guinea takes over Security Council presidency.

MARCH 7

Security Council likely to discuss Mr. Blix's report.

APRIL 11

Next report due from Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the nuclear inspection chief.
