

THREATS AND RESPONSES: EDUCATION; Debate on War With Iraq Is Entering the Classroom
By Lynette Clemetson
Dec. 1, 2002

It was barely 8:30 in the morning, and already the debate over Iraq had hit fever pitch. ''The administration has the right to act quickly,'' one passionate speaker said. ''The president is just doing this for political gain,'' fired back an opponent. ''Saddam has proven he can't be trusted,'' lobbed another.

The discussion was still going strong when the bell rang for change of class. ''Already?'' a lanky teenager groaned, as he scooped up his books.

Anyone who thinks young people are not paying attention to the brewing conflict with Iraq should visit the first-period social studies class at Lakeridge Junior High School here in Orem, a quiet town north of Provo. Students in Donell Willey's world studies class here have debated the Iraq issue five times this school year. The spirited discussions sometimes carry over to the lunchroom, to online messages or into evening phone calls that might otherwise be devoted to the latest episode of ''Yu-Gi-Oh,'' the new Japanese anime craze.

Not since the Vietnam War, it seems, have young people been so engaged in America's foreign policy. On college campuses, students on both sides of the Iraq issue are organizing protests, debates and symposiums. Young professionals are convening online discussion groups to pick apart daily news developments. And discussions like those at Lakeridge are taking place in junior high and high schools around the country.

Some veterans of the student movement of the 1960's say today's discussions are more informed and nuanced than those that took place in the early days of American military involvement in Vietnam.

''If you could get 10 people who knew where Vietnam was in 1964 you were doing good,'' said Sam W. Brown Jr., former United States ambassador and a founding coordinator of the Vietnam Moratorium Committee, the student movement that organized some of the largest antiwar demonstrations of the 1960's.

Mr. Brown said the attacks of Sept. 11, television's 24-hour news channels and a more open political system have created a ''remarkably different dynamic today'' that makes the issues hard to ignore, even for teenagers.

Suzie Mitchell-Barnes, 14, a ninth grader at Lakeridge, said: ''Parents and grown-ups ask us how we know about all this stuff. But how can we not? It's all around us.''

Since they cannot escape it, said Mr. Willey, who is in charge of the social studies department at this school of roughly 1,200 students, ''you might as well find a way to make it real for them, let them explore the facts and their feelings.''

He requires students to listen to National Public Radio, read the newspapers and watch the evening news. He enrolled the school in the Model United Nations program, and homework regularly includes researching United Nations resolutions and preparing position papers for debates.

The international dramas playing out in Washington and at the United Nations are far removed from daily life in Orem. But the outward-looking curiosity of students at Lakeridge, said Mr. Willey, is also being influenced by changes happening in their own school and neighborhoods.

Residents here affectionately refer to the county surrounding Orem as Happy Valley because of its traditional homogeneity. A middle- to upper-middle-class haven of roughly 100,000, it has long been overwhelmingly Mormon, conservative, Republican and white.

But in the last several years, Latinos and Asians have begun to settle in Orem, attracted by jobs, safe neighborhoods and relatively low housing prices. Some newcomers are converts to the Mormon religion, but increasingly, many are not.

The percentage of whites at Lakeridge dropped to 82 percent this year from 93 percent five years ago. There are no Middle Eastern or Muslim students at the school. But more than ever, views from other cultures and religions are being incorporated into classroom discussions.

Mr. Willey's class of 32 now includes students like Barbenly Vergara, a Roman Catholic born in the Philippines; Lai Xue, an agnostic from China; and Krystian Perez, whose Puerto Rican parents moved to the area after they converted from Catholicism to Mormonism.

In the recent debate, when one student argued for President Bush's right to strike Iraq with or without widespread public support, Barbenly Vergara jumped in. ''The Constitution here says we the people, not we the government,'' she said. ''You can't just let the president decide things on his own.''

Students got a firsthand account of war a day later when Staff Sgt. Mike Riffle of the Army's Special Forces talked with students about his experiences.

During the talk by Sergeant Riffle, a Lakeridge graduate who recently returned from Afghanistan, many students were focused on his cool Kevlar vest. But Lai Xue, who said his views were still shaped largely by his family's Chinese perspective, homed in on the soldier's use of the words ''happiness'' and ''freedom.''

''Most American kids always think they are unhappy because of dumb reasons like school and friends,'' Lai, 13, said after the presentation. ''That soldier is willing to sacrifice himself so we will not lose real happiness and freedom.''

Mr. Willey's class assignments, which include asking students to state positions on war with Iraq from the perspective of different countries like Russia, Britain, Indonesia and Germany, have prompted the teenagers to think deeply about the events swirling around them.

''At first I didn't even want to know how I felt about the war, because it's scary,'' said TeriAnn Radmall, 14, who was born and raised in Orem in a Mormon family, and who was taking time from piano lessons to prepare for a forthcoming debate on strengthening transitional governments. ''But now everyone is thinking about all kinds of things. It makes it more challenging to stand for and stick with what you believe.''

The action in Mr. Willey's class is becoming infectious. Students in Sara Hacken's seventh-grade history spent a recent class taking on arguments they had heard from their families and older students.

''Killing Saddam Hussein won't bring a solution,'' said Nicolas Blosil, 12. ''There are lots of people like him who will come to take his place.''

Mary Anne Seeley, also 12, was ready with a quick rebuttal. ''But we can't just do nothing,'' she said. ''They are career terrorists, just like career criminals. The only way to stop them is to put them away for good.''

When the last-period bell rang, Mr. Willey's students gathered in the auditorium to practice for a regional Model United Nations conference. Several other students -- children who are not part of the class, but want to be -- poked their way in to observe.

''My friends say it's hard, but it's interesting,'' said Shannon Mills, 15, a ninth grader from another history class who was hoping to join the day's debate. ''Kids are thinking about this stuff anyway. It is good to have some way to talk about it and understand it all.''
