

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE ALLIES; In Blunt Words, Bush Threatens Hussein Again
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Nov. 21, 2002

President Bush threatened Saddam Hussein today in dire terms, vowing ''the severest of consequences'' if Mr. Hussein did not fully disclose Iraq's inventory of weapons by Dec. 8, the deadline set by the United Nations.

Mr. Bush made the threat during a speech that called for a fundamental transformation of NATO, the trans-Atlantic alliance born of the cold war to contain the Soviet Union. He called on the alliance to re-create itself as a leaner and swifter military force to take on the new threat of terrorism -- including, by clear implication, Mr. Hussein. [Transcript, Page A22.]

Mr. Bush said NATO must develop more modern military skills, including more precise bombs, more streamlined command structures and bigger special operations forces, like the elite commandos who were the first Americans in the plains and mountains of Afghanistan.

More than 40 heads of state began to gather today in this gray and historic city for a two-day NATO summit meeting on how the alliance will fight what Mr. Bush called the ''great evil'' stirring the world, and Mr. Hussein loomed large. The talks begin Thursday.

''Saddam Hussein has been given a very short time to declare completely and truthfully his arsenal of terror,'' Mr. Bush told a student forum at the Prague Hilton this afternoon.

''Should he again deny that this arsenal exists, he will have entered his final stage with a lie. And deception this time will not be tolerated. Delay and defiance will invite the severest of consequences.''

Mr. Hussein's failure to disclose fully what Western experts believe to be more than 100 weapons sites would clearly constitute a ''material breach'' of his obligations, as laid out in a tough new United Nations resolution demanding weapons inspections, administration officials say.

But the officials were vague about whether such a breach would be considered grounds for an attack on Iraq. The most hawkish members of the administration say it would, but few NATO allies support that view.

''Our NATO alliance faces dangers very different from those it was formed to confront,'' Mr. Bush said.

''Yet never has our need for collective defense been more urgent. The Soviet Union is gone, but freedom still has enemies. We're threatened by terrorism, bred within failed states, it's present within our own cities.

''We're threatened by the spread of chemical and biological and nuclear weapons, which are produced by outlaw regimes and could be delivered either by missile or terrorist cell.''

Significantly, though, Mr. Bush did not call on NATO to join him in any future attack on Iraq.

This reflected what national security experts saw as the United States' reluctance to be slowed down by the large and aging alliance, especially after having led the war in Afghanistan virtually on its own.

Instead, in a news conference this morning with Vaclav Havel, the Czech president, in the splendor of Prague Castle, Mr. Bush said it was up to each country to decide whether it wanted to take part in a war with Iraq.

''If the decision is made to use military force,'' Mr. Bush said, ''we will consult with our friends, and we hope that our friends will join us. It's a decision Germany will make, just like it's a decision the Czech Republic will make, just like it's a decision Great Britain will make.''

But in his speech this afternoon, in a clear criticism of Germany and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, who has refused to take part in any military campaign against Iraq, Mr. Bush added: ''The world needs the nations of this continent to be active in the defense of freedom, not inward-looking or isolated by indifference. Ignoring dangers or excusing aggression may temporarily avert conflict, but they don't bring true peace.''

Mr. Bush and Mr. Schröder have had strained relations since the chancellor campaigned for re-election this fall on a platform opposing a war in Iraq. Tonight at a dinner for NATO leaders at Prague Castle, there was no noticeable interplay between Mr. Bush and Mr. Schröder, who sat opposite each other at a round table for 40.

The men were also far apart during a ceremony in the throne room before the dinner, and could not be seen making contact.

In his speech to the students, Mr. Bush spoke forcefully about the expansion of NATO, which is formally inviting seven former Communist nations -- Lithuania, Romania, Latvia, Estonia, Slovenia, Slovakia and Bulgaria -- to join.

''Tomorrow, NATO grows larger,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Tomorrow, the soul of Europe grows stronger.''

The new members, he added, will bring ''greater clarity'' to the alliance because they have experienced tyranny and repression.

''Those who have lived through a struggle of good against evil are never neutral between them,'' Mr. Bush said.

''Czechs and Slovaks learned through the harsh experience of 1938 that when great democracies fail to confront danger, greater dangers follow.''

For the past century, Mr. Bush added, the names of European cities -- Verdun, Munich, Stalingrad, Dresden, Nuremberg, Yalta -- ''have often stood for conflict and tragedy and loss.'' Now, he said, ''we do have the power to write a different story for our time.''

Mr. Bush spoke in the Grand Ballroom of the Prague Hilton after the White House abruptly switched the site from the headquarters of Radio Free Europe, which in the Communist era was the Parliament building. Officials insisted that the switch had not resulted from a specific threat but from ''generalized concerns'' about the site.

Radio Free Europe, which defines its mission as broadcasting information and ideas to promote democracy, has long been considered a potential target of terrorist attacks.

The security in Prague remained intense. American F-15 and F-16 fighter jets patrolled the gray skies over the Vltava River, which runs through the center of town, and whole blocks of the city were closed.

Many streets were empty, and business was slow. Schools have been closed for a week; authorities have urged parents to take their children to the countryside. Even Prague residents without children have temporarily left town rather than face the headaches from the heightened security.

Two years ago, during a meeting here of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, more than 100 police officers were injured in battles with protesters.

At the news conference with President Havel today, Mr. Bush said once again that war with Iraq was not his first choice. ''If the collective will of the world is strong,'' he said, ''we can achieve disarmament peacefully. However, should he choose not to disarm, the United States will lead a coalition of the willing to disarm him.''

Mr. Bush also met with Lord Robertson, NATO's secretary general, and President Ahmet Necdet Sezer of Turkey, which has expressed strong concerns that a war with Iraq, which it borders, should be avoided at all costs.
