

The World: The Ethics of Shooting First; Iraq (Will) (Won't) Respect America if It Waits
By Serge Schmemann
Sept. 29, 2002

THERE'S that scene in the movie ''Unforgiven'' in which Clint Eastwood guns down a man in a bar and Gene Hackman exclaims, ''You just shot an unarmed man!'' ''Well, he shoulda armed himself,'' Mr. Eastwood replies.

It is about as succinct a definition of deterrence as any -- at least of the classic kind, which held that if two sides are roughly equal in power, maybe they won't fight.

On the other hand, had the victim been armed, Mr. Eastwood might have shot him even quicker. He is, after all, a man prepared to violate all the conventions.

So what would it take to stop the Eastwood character? Well, there's shooting him first. That might mean sinking to his low level, but you do come out alive.

These are the kinds of debates that have come to the fore as the Bush administration relentlessly presses its case for taking out Saddam Hussein. Does it only encourage defiance, as the president himself has argued, to ever trust Mr. Hussein again? Does it make sense to give him any more time to delay, when there are reports that Al Qaeda figures have shown up in Baghdad? But is it wise, as some allies have been asking at the United Nations, to attack Mr. Hussein without giving him a last chance to make inspections work? And is it smart, as Al Gore, Senator Edward M. Kennedy and some other Democrats have asked, to go after him alone?

The heart of the administration's argument can be put succinctly: He's got bad weapons, he's shown he will use them, and he's had his chance. And to back down now is to make him think you're all bluster.

For most of its history, Israel would have agreed, having accepted in its earliest days the premise that in a tough neighborhood, you have to be the toughest, whatever the cost. ''It is not in our hands to prevent the murder of workers in the fields and families in their sleep,'' Moshe Dayan, then commander of the Israeli military, declared in 1953. ''But it is in our hands to fix a high price for our blood, so high that the Arab community and the Arab military forces will not be willing to pay for it.''

His main instrument then was a young officer named Ariel Sharon, who had formed a no-holds-barred commando group called Unit 101. Its job was to retaliate, and retaliate hard, for the death of every Jew.

Mr. Sharon has since acknowledged that his political and military superiors leaders had qualms. ''Wouldn't there be casualties?'' he paraphrased them as saying in his autobiography two decades ago. ''Wouldn't there be international complications?'' But Mr. Sharon, then as now, had no qualms: ''They had no other solution, and when they saw that these operations were feasible, it gave them confidence and hope.''

For a period in the 1990's, however, the notion gained popularity among Israelis that confidence and hope could now be better achieved through a conciliatory stance. In the first Persian Gulf war, in 1991, the Americans persuaded Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to keep out of the way, and he did, even when 39 Scud missiles fell on Israel. For a time, the restraint was seen by most Israelis as a noble and courageous deference to their great patron, the United States. The restraint of 1991 blossomed into the Oslo agreements of 1993, and into Israel's withdrawal from southern Lebanon in 2000. On the Israeli left, these actions were hailed as evidence that the Jewish state had reached a mature confidence in its ability and will to defend itself against one or all of its enemies.

Today, after two years of violence, public opinion polls indicate that very few Israelis still favor restraint, either in response to suicide bombings, or in the event of an Iraqi attack. In the public perception, the first gulf war, Oslo and Lebanon are now seen as confirmation of the cardinal rule of the early years -- if you show anything that can be interpreted as weakness, they'll exploit it.

NOT everyone agrees. ''The permanent difficulty with this argument is that you can never prove the contrary,'' said Mark Heller, a senior researcher at the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University. ''You can't demonstrate that things would have been different.''

Still, there is considerable evidence that at least some Palestinians bought into the claims of Hezbollah, the Shiite resistance movement that fought Israel in southern Lebanon, that the Israelis could be worn down by casualties and danger. Leaders of the Hamas movement have used the same argument to pursue suicide bombings.

Some of the same arguments have been heard in the United States -- that by not responding fiercely to earlier terror attacks in Beirut, for example, or to Mr. Hussein's attempt to assassinate George Bush the elder, or the bombing of the destroyer Cole, Americans confirmed themselves in hostile minds as a hedonistic, consumer society not prepared to take casualties or risks -- what Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, the head of Hezbollah, terms a ''spider web society,'' one built on weak strands.

There are obvious limits to any comparison of the United States and Israel. Whatever Mr. Hussein may stand accused of, he does not pose an existential, or even an immediate threat to the United States. And if Washington has a relatively clear objective, definable in short-range terms -- the overthrow of Mr. Hussein -- the Israelis still have to work toward a future alongside a Palestinian state. The Bush administration has never bought into Mr. Sharon's conviction that force is the only way to go -- endlessly battering Yasir Arafat's headquarters, the administration declared, was ''not helpful.''

What the Bush administration does have in common with Mr. Sharon's government is that both have declared their enemy as ''terrorism,'' a term that by definition precludes any response but force.

''I do think that terrorism creates psychological changes,'' said Hemi Shalev, a columnist for the daily newspaper Maariv. ''Terrorism erases the options that are usually open to statesmen -- negotiations, restraint, stalling. I do think that from that point of view there is similarity. The reaction to terrorism is one that lends itself to the use of force.''

There is an obvious risk in reducing options to the use of force. Mr. Hussein, for example, may lose whatever restraint he felt against using the most lethal of his weapons. And Mr. Arafat, however battered, can declare victory simply by withstanding the beating. But once used, force also restores the power of deterrence. The leaders who come after Mr. Hussein and Mr. Arafat, having witnessed a determined use of strength, may not be so quick to confuse restraint with weakness.