

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NEGOTIATIONS; Iraq Agrees to Inspections of Some Sites, But Draws Line at Surprise Visits to Palaces
By Mark Landler
Oct. 2, 2002

Iraq said today that it was planning for the arrival of United Nations weapons inspectors in two weeks, promising them access to its most important sites.

Iraq agreed in two days of talks here with the United Nations to allow inspectors to make surprise visits to sites like the Defense Ministry and the headquarters of Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard.

But it drew the line at unannounced inspections of Mr. Hussein's presidential palaces, saying it would adhere to an existing agreement with the United Nations that makes it all but impossible for the inspectors to adequately scrutinize them.

Later today, Washington undercut the Iraqi response by rejecting any resumption of inspections in the absence of tough new ground rules. The United States and Britain have demanded that the palaces be opened, charging that Iraq uses the eight vast compounds to hide elements of its chemical, nuclear and biological weapons programs.

Washington, which is trying to win passage of a Security Council resolution that would threaten Iraq with military action if it does not rid itself of these weapons, said it made no sense to send inspectors now.

''We need a new resolution with clear terms, tough terms,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told reporters in Washington. ''We will not be satisfied with Iraqi half-truths, or Iraqi compromises or Iraqi efforts to get us back in the same swamp.''

United Nations officials, however, welcomed Iraq's agreement on access, saying it and other new arrangements would lift most of the restrictions that had hobbled their efforts for much of the 1990's and led to their departure in 1998, on the eve of an American and British bombing raid.

''There is a readiness to accept inspections that did not exist before,'' Hans Blix, chief of the United Nations inspection commission, said at a news conference with his Iraqi counterpart after the talks adjourned. ''We have now established that there is access to all sites.''

Mr. Blix, a Swede who ran the International Atomic Energy Agency before assuming his present post in 2000, seemed sensitive to accusations that this meeting had become something of a sideshow to the negotiations unfolding at the United Nations. But he signaled his readiness to leave for Iraq, under whatever mandate the Security Council granted him.

''We are also aware of the new resolution on the table, but our planning remains based upon the resolutions we have now,'' he said.

Iraq's readiness to come to terms with the United Nations this week, following on its earlier offer of unfettered access, did not surprise longtime observers. Iraq, they said, views the inspections as a tool to slow the momentum of President Bush's campaign against Mr. Hussein.

''The Iraqi strategy is to keep the inspection program rolling as long as possible,'' said Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a research and advocacy group in Washington. ''At least long enough to delay an American invasion of their country.''

During the meeting today, Iraq fulfilled its pledge to hand over a report on sites and materials that have a dual civilian and military purpose. The report, on four CD-ROM's, is meant to bring the United Nations up to date on chemical plants and other sites that are likely targets for immediate inspections.

''We need to analyze that information, but more important, we need to go back and verify that information,'' said Muhammad el-Baradei, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is responsible for monitoring Iraq's nuclear weapons, while Mr. Blix's group focuses on the biological and chemical capacity.

Iraq's chief representative, Amir al-Sadi, said that he assumed every team of inspectors would seek to visit secret sites, and that his government would not require advance notice to let them in.

But Mr. al-Sadi said that the presidential palaces lay beyond the scope of these talks, which focused mainly on logistical issues, like how the inspectors would be housed and transported within Iraq.

Access to the palaces is restricted under the terms of a 1998 memorandum signed by Secretary General Kofi Annan and Iraq's deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz. The agreement, which requires inspectors to give advance notice of visits to palaces, was endorsed by the Security Council.

''Honestly, I don't understand why it is so critical,'' Mr. al-Sadi said of the palace access question. ''Anyway, it was not a subject on the agenda.''

The palaces are part of a draft resolution the United States formally introduced into discussion today at the Security Council. It also seeks no-flight zones and exclusion zones along routes where inspectors travel, to be protected by United Nations, American or other allied forces.

The two sides worked through a laundry list of logistical issues, ranging from security and entry visas to lodging and landing rights. Among the issues singled out by Mr. Blix was Iraq's pledge to ensure the safety of inspections conducted from the air, with helicopters or planes.

He noted, however, that Baghdad could not fully guarantee the safety of aircraft in the ''no flight'' zones in northern and southern Iraq. These zones are patrolled by American and British fighter jets, and, according to the Pentagon, are subject to routine antiaircraft fire.

Mr. Blix added that Iraq would permit United Nations planes to land at Saddam International Airport, minutes from central Baghdad, rather than Habbaniya, about 50 miles from the city.

Such issues seem mundane, but former inspectors say they have a direct bearing on the success of missions.

The United Nations has not yet scrutinized the four CD-ROM's -- a process that could take weeks, given the voluminous amounts of data. Under the Security Council resolution, Iraq is required to report on its dual-use activities twice a year. It has not done so since December 1998, when the inspectors left. So these discs contain a backlog of reports, plus the current one.

Asked if the information was reliable, Mr. Sadi, the Iraqi chief representative, said, ''Whatever data is required, is given.''

Mr. Sadi, a special adviser to President Hussein, was circumspect at the news conference; United Nations officials said he had to be cajoled to join Mr. Blix and Mr. Baradei on the dais. But he thanked them for talks that he described as ''businesslike, purposeful, focused.''
Correction: Oct. 3, 2002
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about logistical negotiations between Iraq and weapons inspectors from the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency referred incorrectly to the status of a draft United Nations resolution intended to increase the inspectors' access. The resolution, which was being prepared by the United States and Britain, was not formally presented to the Security Council yesterday; as noted in other articles yesterday, the drafting is still in progress.
