

The World; Iraq's Ties to Terror: The Threat Isn't Easy to Read
By Yossi Melman
Feb. 9, 2003

IN making the case last week that Saddam Hussein threatens the world, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell offered the United Nations evidence that Iraq has links to Al Qaeda. It is true that Saddam Hussein has a long history of association with terrorist groups. But these links are not as simple as they seem, and provide only hints about the use Mr. Hussein might make of any ties to Al Qaeda.

Like other Arab leaders, Mr. Hussein has been involved in Palestinian politics for decades; in the 1970's and 80's he was harboring the May 15 Organization led by Abu Ibrahim, which specialized in bombing airplanes, and a cadre of the Palestine Liberation Front run by Muhammad Abul Abbas that hijacked the cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985 and murdered Leon Klinghoffer, an American Jewish passenger in a wheelchair.

But by far the most significant link Iraq had to Palestinian terrorism was Sabry al-Banna, also known as Abu Nidal. Starting in 1973, when he broke with Yasir Arafat, Abu Nidal became Mr. Hussein's most reliable master terrorist.

Iraq provided weapons, training and logistical support, allowing the group to battle both the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel. For his part, Abu Nidal served for a while as Mr. Hussein's hired gun in missions to subvert Syria's regime.

His group was tied to a raid on a Damascus hotel in 1976 (which ended when Syrian security forces rescued hostages), to attacks on Syrian embassies in Italy and Pakistan, and to an aborted attempt to assassinate Syria's foreign minister.

But Iraq's collusion in these actions appeared to be more the exception than the general pattern that Iraq has followed in the last 25 years. Unlike other states linked to terrorism -- Libya and Iran, for example -- Iraq did not make a habit of directly ordering terror beyond its borders. Abu Nidal remained active against Israel, but Iraq did not use him again as a terrorist subcontractor in the direct pursuit of Iraqi aims.

For a time Abu Nidal left Iraq, returning in 1998. He died in Baghdad last summer, reportedly of four bullet wounds to the head. The Iraqis said it was a suicide, but few people outside Iraq believed it.

''Iraq was always very careful when it came to having contacts with terrorist networks,'' said Reuven Paz, a former Israeli intelligence analyst who runs the independent Project to Research Islamist Movements, which monitors Web sites in Islamic lands. ''Sheltering and supporting them politically and materially, yes. Relying on them for plots and assassination campaigns was something different and too risky.''

When the Iraqi regime wished to eliminate its opponents, Mr. Paz continued, ''it preferred to use its own, more reliable, state security agents.''

Iran, by contrast, never hesitated to cultivate terrorist groups like Hezbollah in Lebanon to pursue Iran's own aims -- for example, in the killing of Western troops and kidnapping of civilians in the 1980's.

But if Mr. Hussein's general pattern has been to avoid working directly with terrorists he harbors, Israeli and European officials say the recently established links between Iraq and Muslim fundamentalists may indicate a shift.

Mr. Powell told the Security Council that Iraq has formed special relationships with two groups. One is run by Abu Mussab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian of Palestinian descent who was sentenced to death in absentia in 1999 by a Jordanian court for plotting, under Osama bin Laden's direction, to attack American and Israeli tourists in Jordan on the eve of the millennium.

Jordanian officials said Mr. Zarqawi went to Afghanistan, and was trained in the use of chemical and biological substances. While running a training camp there, the officials said, he was wounded in an American air raid. He fled to Iraq, where his leg was reportedly amputated.

Israeli, Jordanian and American intelligence officials agree that he could not have received medical treatment without the blessing of Saddam Hussein. ''It is clear that the Iraqis decided to have him around in case they would need him,'' an Israeli intelligence official said.

In the year since, European and American intelligence officials have said that Mr. Zarqawi and his small band of followers had contacts with Al Tawhid, a radical Muslim organization banned by German authorities, and that the Central Intelligence Agency suspects that Mr. Zarqawi may be behind the recent discovery in London of ricin, which was apparently meant to poison British troops. Jordanian authorities accuse Mr. Zarqawi of masterminding the killing last October in Amman of Laurence Foley, an American aid official.

On the other hand, Mr. Zarqawi's name did not appear on the original list of the 22 most-wanted terrorists published by the Federal Bureau of Investigation after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. And the reports about his activities in Iraq don't necessarily mean Mr. Hussein ordered them. Al Qaeda figures have operated or found shelter in many countries, including Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Qatar -- nations the United States considers to be friendly.

EVEN more questions are raised by some experts about the strength of any relationship between Iraq and the second group Mr. Powell discussed, Al Ansar al Islam. This group, several hundred strong, is based in a corner of northern Iraq. It is separated from Mr. Hussein's forces by territory controlled by Kurdish allies of the United States whom it has fought. But its ideology and goals are religious, unlike Mr. Hussein's secular regime. Its leader, Mullah Kreker, lives in Norway, and Mr. Paz said Norwegian officials told him they had no evidence the mullah has carried out terrorist operations.

The group's aim is to establish a Muslim theocracy in Iraq, and in recent press interviews Mullah Kreker has denied charges that his followers were collaborating with Mr. Hussein's intelligence agents. ''We ourselves wish to topple down his regime,'' he was quoted as saying.

Still, Yoram Schweitzer, a researcher at the Jaffe Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University, believes that if Mr. Hussein should find it useful, he would not hesitate to make use of whatever terrorists are on his soil -- as he did with Abu Nidal.

So, however thin the evidence, experts on intelligence tend not to dismiss the possibility that as a last resort the Iraqi leader just might equip terrorists with chemical and biological weapons to be used against their common enemies: the United States, Israel and the West generally.

Mr. Schweitzer said: ''Saddam Hussein can offer his substances to them, and they would not hesitate to accept it, even if they intended to use it in a way the Iraqis hadn't told them to. This is the greatest danger.''
