

THREATS AND RESPONSES: REGIONAL DIPLOMACY; Turkey Calls a Regional Meeting To Try to Head Off an Iraq War
By Dexter Filkins
Jan. 18, 2003

The Turkish prime minister, Abdullah Gul, said today that he had embarked on a major diplomatic effort to head off an American-led war with Iraq, calling regional foreign ministers to a meeting next week.

Alongside the diplomacy, Turkey has also signed up for a role in the effort to oust Saddam Hussein by military means. A Western diplomat here said today that Turkish leaders had agreed in principle to allow American air and ground forces to use the country as a base to stage military strikes against Iraq.

The Turkish diplomatic efforts unfolded amid growing maneuvers across the region to avert an American invasion of Iraq. In a tour of Middle Eastern capitals that ended earlier this week, Mr. Gul said he had discussed a Saudi plan to offer amnesty to senior Iraqi officials in order to encourage them to depose the Iraqi leader. He also said he had passed a letter to Mr. Hussein bluntly warning him of the dangers of war if he did not comply with United Nations resolutions.

''I told him this is not a time for playing games, for making antics,'' Mr. Gul said in an interview here. ''I told him, you have to take the steps necessary to avoid this war.''

Senior members of Mr. Gul's party also reportedly discussed the possibilities of joining with Egyptian officials in an effort to persuade Mr. Hussein to step down.

Turkey's two-track approach -- diplomatic and military -- is emblematic of the growing anxiety across the Middle East, where leaders are growing increasingly desperate to prevent a war but are eager to be on the right side should one start. Many commentators have speculated that the latest flurry of diplomacy is intended, at least in part, to provide political cover for a number of countries, from Turkey to Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, to join a military venture that is overwhelmingly opposed by their own people.

American officials have agreed to ''significantly'' scale back their initial request to bring in 80,000 American troops, but the final composition of the force was still being discussed, the Western diplomat said.

''The Turks have said they would not deny the northern option,'' the diplomat said.

American officials have said that if they decide to open a military campaign against Mr. Hussein, they would go forward whether Turkey signed on or not. But they said they wanted Turkey's participation, for the base for a northern front, because it would make any war shorter and less costly in casualties.

At the same time, Turkey's leaders are wrestling with their own quandaries. Turkey is concerned that a war with Iraq might reignite separatist desires among its large Kurdish population. They also fear that a war could drive hundreds of thousands of Iraqi refugees across its borders, as it did during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

In an interview today, Mr. Gul portrayed himself as a man caught between two irresistible forces: the United States, an important ally for more than 50 years, and the Turkish people, more than 80 percent of whom, a recent poll here reported, were opposed to their country's taking part in a war against Iraq.

''I am not a king; I am not an emir,'' Mr. Gul said. ''Turkey is an open country. We have to take into account the reaction of our people. We have to worry about the street.''

He suggested that a titanic political struggle lay ahead because any decision to accept an American presence would have to be ratified by the country's Parliament.

Mr. Gul's Justice and Development Party holds a majority of seats in the Parliament. But the party, which came to power two months ago, has an Islamist background, and there have been hints that it is deeply divided over the question of taking part in a war against another Islamic country.

''The government knows that if they submit this question to the Parliament, there will be significant defections among the members of their own party,'' said Sedat Ergin, a columnist for the newspaper Hurryiet.

Indeed, the country's leaders continue to send conflicting signals. In recent days, senior leaders have been quoted criticizing the American approach. Last week, several dozen Turkish businessmen, traveling as part of an official delegation, visited Iraq to discuss business opportunities there.

Today, a spokesman for the country's president, Ahmet Necdet Sezer, said any military contribution from Turkey would probably be a limited one.

''We do not want an operation to start,'' said the spokesman, Tacan Ildem. ''Turkey is completely focused on peace efforts.''

Still, there are other signs here that point to the likelihood of a significant American presence in the event of a war. A 150-member American military delegation arrived this week to survey Turkish ports and airfields, and Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was to arrive this weekend for talks.

The Western diplomat said the smaller size of American forces now being contemplated for Turkey would not compromise the military plans. As envisioned by American officials, the American troops based in Turkey would sweep southward toward Baghdad, as the larger force moved northward from bases in Kuwait and elsewhere.

The Western diplomat said the number of American troops had been lowered in response to Turkish requests, which were based largely on a fear of negative public reaction.

''We are trying to meet Turkish concerns while still being fully military capable,'' the diplomat said.

In detailing his diplomatic efforts, Mr. Gul said he had invited the foreign ministers of Egypt, Iran, Kuwait, Syria, Saudi Arabia and Jordan.

In his recent tour, Mr. Gul said he had discussed with Saudi officials a plan to offer amnesty to senior Iraqi officials in an effort to encourage them to depose Mr. Hussein. The plan was first reported by Time magazine. ''It was one of many ideas that were talked about,'' he said.

As for the letter to Mr. Hussein, he said it had been hand-carried by Kursat Tuzmen, the minister for trade. Mr. Gul said he had not asked the Iraqi leader to step down, but in the interview, he implied that he might have gotten that impression.

Even so, Mr. Gul said Mr. Hussein had responded through Mr. Tuzmen. Given the bluntness of the initial note, Mr. Gul said he had found Mr. Hussein's response encouraging.

''He said he thought there was still time to find a peaceful solution,'' he said.
Correction: Jan. 21, 2003
A front-page article on Saturday about efforts by Turkey to head off a war against Iraq misspelled the name of the Turkish newspaper for which Sedat Ergin, who commented on the situation, is a columnist. It is Hurriyet, not Hurryiet.
