

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ALLIES; Turk Offers Partial Support on Iraq in Meeting With Bush
By David E. Sanger
Dec. 11, 2002

President Bush appeared to win qualified support today from the leader of Turkey's governing party for the use of the country's air bases to attack Iraq, senior administration officials said.

The understanding with Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the leader of the Justice and Development Party, could enable the United States to open a northern front that would compel President Saddam Hussein to divide his forces. It came as Mr. Erdogan, a moderate Muslim, visited the White House and promoted his credentials to President Bush.

In a speech before the meeting, Mr. Erdogan said, ''Turkey's preference is for war to be the last resort.'' But he added that ''if Saddam Hussein's administration continues to protect developments which threaten world peace then Turkey will give the necessary support'' for the implementation of the United Nations resolution on Iraq. That resolution threatens ''serious consequences'' if Baghdad fails to make a fully current and accurate declaration of its banned weapons.

White House officials were careful, in both their public and private statements, to avoid any discussion of specific commitments from Mr. Erdogan, whose party leads the fragile coalition that came to power in Turkish elections last month. They are highly aware, they said, that Mr. Erdogan is under enormous public pressure at home to keep the United States out of the bases it used in 1991 during the Persian Gulf war.

While Mr. Erdogan's statement seemed to suggest that Turkey might make its bases available, the degree to which it would allow American forces to use its territory as a major staging area in any confrontation with Iraq still appeared unsettled.

A senior administration official said that during the meeting with President Bush in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, Mr. Erdogan gave ''no commitments,'' but that Mr. Bush was careful not to be too specific when asking for help in basing troops and aircraft. ''They talked about bases,'' the official said, ''and I would characterize the Turks as listening carefully.''

Other officials said Mr. Bush's meeting -- a carefully staged ''drop-by'' during a long meeting conducted by Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser -- was aimed primarily at raising the stature of a Muslim leader who is still barred from serving in the Turkish government. Five years ago Mr. Erdogan was jailed for sedition, leading to the political ban. Mr. Bush, however, sees Mr. Erdogan as a pragmatist and an exemplar of how the Islamic faith and a democratic impulse can coexist.

For his part, Mr. Bush today pressed the case for Turkey's entry into the European Union and promised wide-ranging economic support. Mr. Bush has already called European leaders and pressed Turkey's case for admission to the union, which took a step forward today when European foreign ministers endorsed a plan to open talks on the subject with Turkey in three years.

''We're impressed by your leadership and your party's strong victory,'' Mr. Bush said today, clearly warming to the task of endorsing an Islamic victory. ''We thank you very much for your commitment to democracy and freedom.''

In return for whatever cooperation he extends in the confrontation with Iraq, Mr. Erdogan has made his own needs clear: Washington's willingness to strongarm its European allies to speed consideration of Turkey's application to enter the European Union. ''Undoubtedly, we see our bid to European Union membership as the most important modernization project of our country since the establishment of the republic,'' Mr. Erdogan said today. ''And this will serve as a great jump-start for democracy, enhancement of democracy.''

With the White House and Turkish officials acutely aware that reporters would ask about Turkey's commitments in the event of a war, Mr. Bush and his guest took no questions.

The American endorsement of European Union membership -- an issue on which the United States has no vote and very little say -- comes at a critical moment for Turkey. Last month, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, the head of the European Union's constitutional convention, said Turkey was not truly a European nation, and suggested that its entry to the group would mark the dilution of the European Union. He has since backed away from those comments.

Asked about the issue today, Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said: ''The president differs strongly with anybody in Europe who has suggested that because of Turkey's background Turkey would not qualify. The president does not think that that should be a disqualification.''

Mr. Erdogan was also eager to set aside anxieties about an Islamic-based party taking control of Turkey's coalition government. He requested a breakfast meeting today with American Jewish leaders, and used it to send a message that he would not seek to alter Turkey's unusually close ties to Israel.

One of the Jewish leaders at the breakfast said of Mr. Erdogan, ''It was clear that he wanted to reassure friends of Israel and the U.S. that there will not be a reversal of Turkey's special relationship with Israel,'' adding that Mr. Erdogan ''was very impressive.''

American officials have also talked about expanded economic ties to Turkey. The administration's willingness to support an International Monetary Fund bailout of Turkey during its economic troubles earlier in the year has stood in stark contrast to its reluctance to provide comparable aid to other nations.

By deploying American forces in or near the Turkish border, the United States hopes to fend off any Iraqi attack on ethnic Kurds in the region. That would defuse, they hope, trouble between Turkey's own Kurdish minority and the Iraqi Kurds.

Last week the deputy defense secretary, Paul D. Wolfowitz, visiting Turkey to pave the way for the visit today, said that any major American troop presence in Northern Iraq would have to come through Turkey. ''There is no other option,'' he said.

Turkish officials have repeatedly told the United States, however, that a large American troop presence would not be tolerated by the Turkish people. They note that 83 percent of Turks polled recently by the Pew Research Center, as part of a study of foreign attitudes toward the United States, oppose allowing the United States to use Turkish bases to wage any military action against Iraq.
Correction: Dec. 13, 2002
Two articles on Wednesday -- one about the efforts of Greek and Turkish Cypriots to mend their divisions and one about President Bush's meeting with the leader of Turkey's governing party -- referred incorrectly to the Turkish government. (Articles on Dec. 5, 8 and 9 about Turkey's role in preparations for a possible war on Iraq also included the error.) Turkey is governed by the Justice and Development Party alone; the party won an overwhelming election victory in November.
