

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ'S NEIGHBORS; Arab Leaders Glumly Brace for Inevitable War, With an Eye to Anger in the Streets
By Jane Perlez
Oct. 8, 2002


America's allies in the Arab world are positioning themselves to go along with a United States-led war against Iraq, driven by their need for American strategic and economic assistance, officials and diplomats in the region said.

Each country is maneuvering to signal enough acquiescence to allow them to preserve good relations with Washington but at the same time not provoke new levels of anger in the streets, they said.

In the important Persian Gulf nations where American forces are based -- Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar -- officials acknowledge that their facilities would be used for a war against Iraq.

In recent days, some of those leaders have warned their citizens that the Arab world is too weak to do anything to support the Iraqi people.

''We must not deceive ourselves or the Iraqis or the Palestinians about the joint Arab capabilities to support them or to defend them,'' said the king of Bahrain, Sheik Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, whose country is host to the United States Fifth Fleet.

Generally, the leaders have given the cold shoulder to the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, when he has visited Arab capitals in the past two weeks to rally support. In public and private, the Arab leaders have told him that Iraq must abide by even the most stringent United Nations resolutions on inspections.

The support for the United States is not enthusiastic, and is based on any American military action having the backing of a United Nations resolution. Rivalries among the Arab leaders and the Bush administration goal of removing Saddam Hussein, a fellow leader even if a despised one, will make the kind of Arab unity shown during the Persian Gulf war impossible, officials said.

But the Arab leaders, who have been visiting one another in the last 10 days to take their temperatures, are making individual calculations about how to handle what they all see as an all but certain conflict, they said. Many leaders are politically weak at home, and count on American strategic and financial help to maintain power.

A senior American diplomat in the region said, ''They are figuring out how to give a level of support that doesn't leave them crossway with the United States.'' The involvement of the United Nations, where a new resolution on Iraq is currently being worked out, brought a ''huge sigh of relief'' about Washington's plans, the diplomat said. There is more concern about any war's aftermath -- seen as involving either uncontrollable chaos or American dominance of Iraq -- rather than the war itself, the officials said.

Some Arab countries have concluded that the war could be relatively short, and at the very least is unlikely to involve attacks by Iraq with chemical or biological weapons against them.

In Jordan, the decision to come down on the side of the United States is the most public in the region, and preparations for protecting the national interest in the event of war the most obvious. The borders with the Palestinian territories on the West Bank and with Iraq have been fortified with troops to prevent huge movements of people into Jordan. New government posters in the Jordanian capital, Amman, say ''Jordan First,'' as a way of telling the people that the survival of their country comes before solidarity with the Iraqi people.

''If it comes down to war, we are not going to allow our strategic friendship with the United States to be jeopardized,'' the foreign minister, Marwan Muasher, told an audience at the Council on Foreign Relations in Washington two weeks ago.

In return for this pledge, diplomats said, the Bush administration is not asking Jordan for permission to deploy American troops from Jordanian territory, a move that could severely destabilize the position of King Abdullah.

In the largest Arab country, Egypt, where relations with the United States are at a low point and the public mood is sour, officials described President Hosni Mubarak as being in the most difficult situation.

Egypt, with a faltering economy, receives about $2 billion in annual assistance from the United States, far more than any other Arab country. It is second only to Israel as a recipient of American foreign aid.

Mr. Mubarak has repeatedly warned about the chaos that a war against Iraq would unleash. But at the heart of Mr. Mubarak's problem is the antagonism among the Egyptian public toward what is perceived as the Bush administration's unstinting support of Israel and the Egyptian government's failure to influence Washington on the matter, officials said. Those feelings have spilled into anger against an eventual American-led war in Iraq.

In response to questions about whether Egypt would allow Washington to use its West Cairo airport for the transit of American troops and for refueling of aircraft -- all activities that took place during the 1991 gulf war -- Egyptian officials refused to give a direct answer.

''What the Americans don't understand is -- we can't deviate much from our public opinion,'' said one of Mr. Mubarak's close aides, suggesting that the use of the facilities for the war was of extreme sensitivity.

The Egyptian facilities would be used as staging points rather than for direct strikes, American officials said.

''Mubarak would have to be a very courageous man'' to allow the use of the bases for Iraq, said Ahmed Abdel Halim, a retired Egyptian Army general.

The chairman of the foreign relations committee in the Egyptian Parliament, Dr. Mustafa al-Feqi, said that if the United Nations Security Council ended up giving its blessing to a war against Iraq, then Egypt could consider the use of its facilities.

''If it's the Security Council, it is negotiable,'' Mr. Feqi said. ''If it's not the Security Council, it is impossible to discuss it.''

The Arab countries are maneuvering to go along with the war in part because they have largely concluded they have little sway over Saddam Hussein.

Last month, the foreign minister of Qatar, Sheik Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr al-Thani, met with Mr. Hussein in Baghdad, and tried to convince him to go into exile, according to press reports that are given credibility by Arab diplomats.

At that point in the conversation, Mr. Hussein dismissed the foreign minister and had him driven to the airport, the accounts said.

A senior Arab official said Washington had not shared any of its ideas on who might rule Iraq if Mr. Hussein is ousted by force. ''Everyone is asking, 'Where is the Karzai for Iraq?' '' he said, referring to Hamid Karzai, the American-backed leader of Afghanistan.

''But what is Karzai?'' the official said. ''He's a U.S. stooge. No one wants a U.S. stooge in the region.''
