
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.S. Gives U.N. an Iraq Measure, Seeking a Council Vote Tomorrow
By Julia Preston
Nov. 7, 2002

The United States presented the Security Council today with a proposal for a resolution, revised to draw the support of France, that would give Iraq a last chance to accept rigorous weapons inspections and disarm or face an American-led war.

France did not immediately accept the draft today. President Jacques Chirac agreed in a telephone conversation with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to try to ''remove certain ambiguities'' about the use of force, a spokeswoman in Paris said.

But the French ambassador here, Jean-David Levitte, acknowledged that ''very important progress has been achieved'' with the new text, and said France's goal was to win the broadest possible support for the measure on the 15-member Council.

Ambassador John D. Negroponte put the draft on the Council table after Bush administration officials decided that they had gone as far as they could to attract the support of France, which has steadfastly opposed an immediate authorization of military force. He called for a vote on Friday on the draft, which was also sponsored by Britain.

The latest draft, an intricate work of diplomatic filigree, preserves the United States' prerogative to attack if Iraq fails to comply with the United Nations inspections and also allows for the second round of Council decision-making that France sought, diplomats said. [Text, Page A20.]

In introducing the draft, Mr. Negroponte emphasized Washington's commitment to the inspections. Addressing the qualms of war-wary Council nations, he called the resolution ''the best way to achieve the disarmament of Iraq by peaceful means.''

In Washington, President Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, aimed his comments at a domestic audience, emphasizing that the administration had not compromised its core goals.

''Nothing in this resolution handcuffs the president,'' Mr. Fleischer said. But in a nod to France, he said Mr. Bush ''has committed to'' another Council debate if Iraq did not cooperate with the inspectors.

Russia, another permanent veto-bearing Council nation that has been even more skeptical than France, made no shift today. American officials say they believe that China, the fifth permanent member, may vote for the resolution if France does.

The six-page draft, the third since the negotiations began in mid-September, conserved the administration's bottom line, placing no constraint on Mr. Bush's right to decide when to send American troops to topple Mr. Hussein. But it also showed movement by the administration, in the face of the resistance of its allies, toward accepting the arms inspections as a means to force President Saddam Hussein to relinquish weapons of mass destruction. The president has repeatedly said he does not believe that the Iraqi leader will allow the inspectors to complete their work.

The new draft says the Council has decided ''to afford Iraq, by this resolution, a final opportunity'' to abandon its prohibited weapons.

In the first draft, presented to the five permanent Security Council members in late September, the United States and Britain demanded to use ''all necessary means'' -- shorthand for war -- to disarm Baghdad regardless of the progress of inspections. In the new text, the words ''all necessary means'' have been buried in the preamble, where they have no operational effect.

The compromise intended to give both Washington and Paris what they want comes in adroit, if arcane, turns of phrase in the action passages of the resolution.

In the fourth paragraph, the Council would resolve that any failure by Iraq to cooperate, including ''false statements or omissions'' in a weapons declaration it must submit, will ''constitute a further material breach'' of its obligations. This breach alone would give the United States legal grounds for a military assault, American diplomats said.

But the same clause, reflecting France's demand for a second stage of deliberations, also stipulates that the new breach ''will be reported to the Council for assessment.'' Later, one of the closing paragraphs directs the chief United Nations weapons inspectors to ''report immediately to the Council any interference'' by Iraq with their work. The Council would ''convene immediately to consider the situation''

The draft concludes by recalling that the Council has ''repeatedly warned Iraq of serious consequences'' for its violations, a clear threat of war. Iraq has barred the return of the inspectors since they withdrew in 1998.

The new resolution would set up an inspections program far more intrusive than in the past. It retains the authorization for the inspectors to interview Iraqi scientists in or outside of Iraq and to remove their families from Iraq, but leaves those decisions to the inspectors. Iraq is required to provide the names of all its weapons experts.

The resolution eliminates special procedures established in the past for inspecting Mr. Hussein's palaces and other presidential sites. Under the resolution, the inspectors would have immediate access to any sites they choose.

A provision proposed by Washington for security guards from Council nations to accompany the inspectors has been removed. But the draft still calls for ''exclusion zones,'' with no air flights or ground movement, around sites that the inspectors want to ''freeze'' for examination.

The resolution would allow inspectors to travel freely and without Iraqi searches in and out of the country, move around in aircraft, and use pilotless reconnaissance drones as well. The Council would call upon foreign governments to provide the inspectors with intelligence data to guide their efforts. They can destroy any illegal weapons they find, the draft says.

Once the resolution is adopted, Iraq has seven days to declare whether it intends to comply.

Within 30 days of the resolution, Iraq must present a comprehensive declaration of all its programs to develop chemical, biological or nuclear weapons or long-range missiles.

Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations chemical and biological weapons team, today reiterated to the Council that he thought that it would be difficult for Iraq to report on all of its civilian petrochemical industries as well as its weapons programs within 30 days. American and British diplomats said they would take his comments into account.

Mr. Blix said an advance group of inspectors would leave for Baghdad within 10 days after the resolution is approved.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said this week that the administration expected to know from the weapons declaration whether Iraq was being fully candid. He indicated that if Iraq concealed anything, another debate here and in Washington about war could come as early as mid-December.

But American and British diplomats used no warlike words today.

''This is about the disarmament of Iraq through inspections and by peaceful means,'' said Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British ambassador. ''It is a resolution that sets out two stages,'' he said, seeking to assuage France.

''This is not about triggers,'' he said. ''This is not about the use of force.''
