
THE MARKETS: STOCKS & BONDS; Stock Prices Rise as War In Iraq Appears Inevitable
By Alex Berenson
March 18, 2003

After months of uncertainty, investors reacted with relief yesterday to the news that the White House had dropped its sputtering diplomatic efforts and appeared to be preparing for war with Iraq.

While investors are not looking forward to a war -- and many workers on Wall Street think that they are likely targets for terrorist reprisals -- the news stripped away the cloud of doubt that has hung over stocks since the Iraqi dispute deepened last fall, strategists and money managers said.

Stock prices rallied strongly yesterday for the second time in three trading days, punctuating a warm spell in New York that has followed a winter of terror alerts, job cuts at major investment banks, skyrocketing oil prices and miserable weather. Investors appeared to be responding to progress toward war and the rising hope that the conflict would be brief.

The last gulf war resulted in a quick, decisive victory for the United States, lower oil prices and a strong rally in stocks. Investors appear to believe that even if this war is not quite as successful, it will be better than seemingly endless wrangling over whether to continue inspections for weapons of mass destruction.

''What Wall Street really fears is uncertainty,'' said Jack Caffrey, equity strategist at J.P. Morgan Private Bank, which oversees $250 billion in assets. ''What today's events seem to be pointing to is a reduction in uncertainty, even if the outcome of that is not necessarily a good thing.''

After falling slightly when they opened for trading, stocks rose strongly throughout the day. By day's end, all the major market indexes had gained more than 3 percent, their second strong gain since Thursday, when the White House began to signal that it would move away from its faltering diplomatic efforts.

The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index closed the day up 29.52 points, or 3.5 percent, to 862.79, and the Nasdaq composite jumped 51.94 points, or 3.9 percent, to 1,392.27. The Dow Jones industrial average rose 282.21 points, or 3.6 percent, to 8,141.92. Since Thursday, the Dow has gained almost 600 points.

The rally was extremely broad, on very heavy trading volume. Seven stocks rose on the New York Stock Exchange for every two that fell. Market indexes in Europe also gained, rising more than 3 percent.

In commodities trading, the price of crude oil fell, as traders bet that any war would be swift and would not disrupt the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf. The price of oil for April delivery fell 45 cents a barrel, or 1.3 percent, to $34.93, in regular trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange. In electronic trading after the exchange closed, oil fell another 2.5 percent, to $34.05. Since peaking last week at $37.83 a barrel, oil has fallen 10 percent.

Bond prices also fell, and yields, which had recently dropped to their lowest levels in more than four decades, rose. Money managers said the move reflected confidence that any war would be relatively smooth and would clear the way for stronger economic growth. Strong growth is generally considered bad for bonds because it raises the risk of inflation, and high inflation lowers the value of bonds over time.

The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond rose to 4.80 percent, from 4.71 percent, while the yield on the 10-year note rose to 3.83 percent, from 3.70 percent. The yield on the two-year note rose to 1.63 percent, from 1.54 percent.

Gold, which is seen as a hedge against uncertainty, soared in early trading but ended the day flat.

''There's been an element, I think if you talk to Wall Street and most investors, of, 'We're going to go to war, let's go to war and let's do it,' '' said Tobias Levkovich, equity strategist at Salomon Smith Barney.

Mr. Levkovich, whose offices are in Manhattan, said he thought that people in the financial services industry had accepted that they would have to live with the risk of terrorism. Only a catastrophic attack, like that on Sept. 11, would shake them, he said.

''People are resigned to it,'' Mr. Levkovich said.

Richard DeKaser, chief economist with the National City Corporation, said he thought the rally had just begun. ''The bottom line is if it's war-related uncertainties that have been hammering the market, eliminating those uncertainties will give it a rebound,'' Mr. DeKaser said. ''It's got legs and a long way to go, in my opinion.''

Other investors were less optimistic.

Even if the war goes well, the rally may sputter as investors realize that the economy remains weak and expectations for corporate profits are too high, said Brian Belski, fundamental market strategist at Piper Jaffray, a regional investment bank based in Minneapolis.

''The fundamentals underlying the market are still rather ambiguous,'' Mr. Belski said. ''Is the new bull market starting today? And the answer to that is no.''

William H. Gross, who oversees $300 billion in bond investments for Pacific Investment Management, also said he doubted that the gains were sustainable. ''What's going on today, and what's gone on the last few days,'' he said, ''is simply some front-running of the anticipation that the war will begin and go well and return to the status quo.''

Mr. Gross said that a quick war would not cure the overcapacity, weak corporate profits and soft labor market that ail the economy.

''If the war goes well, and if the economy catches a bit, it won't be strong, and six months later we'll be back in the same slow-growth soup that we are right now,'' Mr. Gross said. In addition, he said, investors seemed to be ignoring the cost of the war and of reconstructing Iraq.

''I think we're looking at deficits of $400, $500 billion as far as the eye can see, and that ultimately means higher inflation, higher interest rates.''

Mr. Gross has been outspoken in his belief that a pre-emptive invasion of Iraq carries great risks for the United States. But he said that his concerns about the economy were not connected to his distaste for a war.

''My personal feelings,'' he said, ''are separate from the business of managing money.''

Here are the results of yesterday's Treasury auction of three- and six-month bills:

(000 omitted in dollar figures)

3-Mo. Bills 6-Mo. Bills Price 99.718 99.439 High Rate 1.115 1.110 Investment Rate 1.137 1.135 Low Rate 1.07% 1.07% Median Rate 1.10% 1.05% Total applied for $37,329,159 $37,206,038 Accepted $21,537,479 $22,589,202 Noncompetitive $1,518,211 $924,520
