

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE ALLIES; Bush Appeals To New Allies On Iraq Plans
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Nov. 24, 2002
.
President Bush extended a welcome to two future NATO partners today, saying that their experience of Communist tyranny equipped them to understand the dangers posed by Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

Speaking before a crowd of tens of thousands here in Romania's capital, Mr. Bush said that because they had seen ''the face of evil'' in their former ruler, Nicolae Ceausescu, ''the people of Romania know that dictators must never be appeased or ignored. They must be opposed.''

Earlier in the day, Mr. Bush delivered a similar message in Vilnius, Lithuania, as the first American president to visit the Baltic country. This week, at a summit meeting in Prague, NATO invited Lithuania, Romania and five other former Communist states to join the military alliance originally established as a shield against the Soviet Union.

As a steady rain fell over Bucharest, Mr. Bush spoke in the city's Revolution Square directly across from the old Communist Party headquarters where, in 1989, a helicopter lifted Mr. Ceausescu off the roof as a mob surged through its doors trying to kill him. Three days later, Mr. Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, were executed by a firing squad.

''You value freedom, because you have lived without it,'' said Mr. Bush, his face drenched with rain. ''You know the difference between good and evil, because you have seen the face of evil.''

An ''aggressive dictator,'' Mr. Bush said, ''now rules in Iraq. By his search for terrible weapons, by his ties to terrorist groups, the dictator of Iraq threatens the security of every free nation, including the free nations of Europe.''

The speech was one of the few that Mr. Bush has made to such a large crowd outdoors since the Sept. 11 attacks, and he addressed the gathering behind a screen of bulletproof glass. Sharpshooters were stationed atop buildings throughout the square.

The speech echoed one Mr. Bush made earlier today in Lithuania.

Before a much smaller crowd in City Hall Square in Vilnius, Mr. Bush compared the threat from today's terrorists to the Nazis and Communists who controlled much of Europe for parts of the 20th century. Like the Nazis and the Communists, Mr. Bush said, ''the terrorists seek to end lives and control all life.''

Mr. Bush told the Lithuanians that ''we must be willing to stand in the face of evil, to have the courage to always face danger.''

''The people of the Baltic states have shown these qualities to the world,'' Mr. Bush said. ''You have known cruel oppression and withstood it. You were held captive by an empire and you outlived it.''

The president's two stops today, the last leg of a five-day trip to the NATO meeting in Prague and a meeting with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia in St. Petersburg, were another extension of his campaign to seek support for military action against Iraq.

Romania in particular is of strategic importance to that campaign because its ports on the Black Sea are a link to the Middle East, and could supply bases from Turkey to the Persian Gulf that are used by American and British forces. Although the country appeared an unlikely candidate a little more than a year ago -- it is still struggling with corruption and the transition to a market economy -- that changed after the Sept. 11 attacks.

''NATO membership will make Romania more secure,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And Romania will add to the strength of the NATO alliance as we face unprecedented new dangers. Already, our troops are serving side by side in Afghanistan. Already, Romania has joined the global coalition against terror.''

Mr. Bush's words also offered Mr. Putin reassurance that Russia had nothing to fear from NATO's expansion. ''In the peaceful future we're building, Romania will strengthen our lives in another way -- as a bridge to a new Russia,'' Mr. Bush said. ''For centuries, Romania's geography was a source of danger. Now, you can help our alliance to extend a hand of cooperation across the Black Sea.''

Russia, Mr. Bush said, has nothing to fear from the growth of NATO because Russia needs peaceful, stable neighbors like Romania. ''As I told President Putin yesterday, a Russia that is fully part of Europe needs no buffer zone separating it from Europe,'' he said. ''America and Romania are friends to the Russian people, and so is the NATO alliance.''

Although Mr. Bush praised Romania for choosing free markets over state control and democracy over dictatorship, he said the nation had to work harder toward change.

''NATO's invitation to join was also a vote of confidence that you will continue the hard work of political, economic and military reform,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Your hardship did not end with your oppression.''

The president also paid a tribute to those Romanians who had lost their lives in one of the bloodiest rebellions that swept Communism from Eastern Europe more than a decade ago.

''On this historic square, among the monuments to Romania's greatness, there's also a building left in ruins -- the former offices of the secret police,'' Mr. Bush said.

''It is a fitting reminder of all the cruelties done there, and the justice that rose up against oppression,'' he said. ''That grim monument also recalls the many brave Romanians who did not live to see this day.''

In both Bucharest and Vilnius, Mr. Bush promised the new allies that by joining NATO, an attack on one member of the alliance would be considered an attack on all.

''Our alliance has made a solemn pledge of protection, and anyone who would choose Lithuania as an enemy has also made an enemy of the United States of America,'' Mr. Bush said to applause in Vilnius. ''In the face of aggression, the brave people of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia will never stand alone again.''

Mr. Bush's appearance outside the Vilnius City Hall was a powerful and poignant sight for Lithuanians, and would have been an unthinkable moment for most of the past 60 years. From its annexation by the Soviet Union in 1940 into the early 1990's the nation was occupied by either the Nazis or the Communists. The United States refused to recognize its annexation and maintained that position up until the country achieved independence in 1991.

He appeared on stage in Vilnius with Lithuania's president, Valdas Adamkus, as well as the leaders of the two other Baltic states, President Vaira Vike-Freiberga of Latvia and President Arnold Ruutel of Estonia.

In Bucharest, he appeared with President Ion Iliescu, who told Mr. Bush in a ceremony at the Cotroceni Palace here that ''we have understood the concern of the American partners regarding phenomena such as corruption and bureaucracy.''
