

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq Denounces Visit to Palace By U.N. Team
By John F. Burns
Dec. 5, 2002

The first week of United Nations weapons inspections here ended today with a furious Iraqi broadside against the inspectors for having insisted on a no-notice search of one of President Saddam Hussein's innumerable palaces on Tuesday.

Iraq also took the occasion to deny again, in some of the least ambiguous terms it has used, that it possesses any banned nuclear, chemical or biological arms.

''We have no weapons of mass destruction, absolutely no weapons of mass destruction,'' Maj. Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, leader of the National Monitoring Directorate set up to work with inspectors, said tonight.

He made the denial, in English, at a news conference that bristled with indignation at the ''ridiculous'' palace inspection and ascribed it to pressures from the United States, Britain and Israel.

The day's events suggested the conflicting pressures building in Baghdad, barely 72 hours before Iraq promised to deliver a declaration on any secret weapons programs.

The declaration will be a crunch point for Mr. Hussein as he navigates the toughest crisis of his long dictatorship: meeting the United Nations' demands in ways that avoid war while saving his prestige, if not his weapons programs.

There were signs today, including the prickly language of a Foreign Ministry statement on the palace inspection, that the trigger for its outburst might have been Mr. Hussein, incensed at the intrusion.

Using the sort of confrontational imagery that he often has when challenged, the ministry asked why the inspectors had not worn protective suits for the palace visit if they believed that there might be biological, chemical or nuclear weapons there.

General Amin, the Iraqi monitoring director, suggested that the inspectors had gone to the palace as a way of flexing their muscles -- and of responding to pressures from President Bush to step up the pace and scope of the inspections. He suggested the real purpose of the palace search was to humiliate Mr. Hussein.

''We consider the entry to presidential sites as unjustified and really unnecessary, because the sites are very well known, and the palaces are the people's,'' he said. ''That means it's impossible to keep weapons of mass destruction there. It's ridiculous, really. The real aim was political -- to provoke Iraq and harm its dignity.''

The Foreign Ministry suggested that the palace search could throw the inspections back to the climate of the 1990's, when an earlier generation of inspectors met relentless intransigence and deceit from Iraqi officials and were eventually withdrawn. ''The coming days will prove whether the inspectors are clinging to their neutral international identity, or will bow to American and British pressures and blackmail and become an eye for spying on targets and for purposes not mentioned in the Security Council resolution,'' it said.

There have been nearly 20 inspections since the United Nations teams started work here on Nov. 27, including two today at the Muthanna and Tuwaitha complexes, the vast complexes north and south of Baghdad that were the main centers for Iraq's nuclear and chemical weapons programs in the 1980's and '90's. But by singling out the palace, the government abandoned its earlier accommodating tone.

In effect, it joined an ill-tempered three-way exchange, stretching from Baghdad to Washington, that began with a remark President Bush made in Louisiana on Tuesday. He said that although the Iraqi leader ''says he doesn't have weapons of mass destruction, he's got them. He's not only got them, he's used them.''

Today the inspectors joined in the fray. Demetrius Perricos, head of the team conducting the biological, chemical and missile inspections, was asked tonight whether there were differences between President Bush's downbeat assessment and the teams' appraisal of their progress. ''You bet there are differences,'' he said.

''The people who sent us here are the international community, the United Nations,'' said Mr. Perricos, who is Greek. ''We are not serving the United States, we are not serving the United Kingdom.''

He implied that Mr. Bush bore some responsibility for the challenge facing the inspection teams.

Asked about Mr. Bush's statements, Mr. Perricos said, ''I hope you will understand that we are not getting all the intelligence that President Bush is getting.''

The Council's Resolution 1441 said Iraq had a 30-day deadline, ending on Sunday, to deliver ''an accurate, full, final and complete disclosure of all aspects of its programs to develop weapons of mass destruction.''

Today, General Amin confirmed that Iraq would meet the deadline on Saturday, with a day to spare. He implied that documents would be handed over in Baghdad, which would leave the United Nations with the task of carrying the declaration to the Security Council in New York. He said Iraq would offer up a ''bulky'' pile of documents, in Arabic and English, and ''probably some CD-ROM's.''

Other Iraqi officials have said the declaration may run as long as 2,000 pages. At their news conference, Mr. Perricos, the United Nations weapons inspector, and Jacques Baute, a French nuclear physicist who leads the nuclear inspections team, said the sheer size of the task would mean that it might be ''some time'' -- at least days -- before anybody could determine whether anything in the information could be deemed a banned weapons program.

On Tuesday, General Amin told reporters that the declaration would include some ''new elements,'' raising the possibility that Baghdad had decided to acknowledge some banned weapons projects.

But General Amin said today that the reference to new information was to ''new technologies and new activities'' undertaken during the weapons inspectors' four-year absence. Those would be in so-called ''dual-use'' categories of work, meaning civilian research and development that uses some of the same materials but is not aimed at producing weapons.

As the moment of the declaration approaches, Iraq has also been trying to shake off American and British allegations that it tried in recent years to import aluminum tubes needed to build gas centrifuges for enriching uranium -- a program substantially disrupted by the inspection teams in the 1990's.

General Amin said the declaration would show that the aluminum tubing Iraq ordered, at a diameter of 81 millimeters, was intended for use in ''artillery rockets with a range of less than 10 kilometers,'' or about six miles, and was far too small for use in uranium enrichment.

Mr. Perricos and Mr. Baute have said they and other officials in the weapons inspections agencies have extensive knowledge of Iraq's past weapons programs and of the ruses used to hide them.

Still, when Mr. Perricos was asked what he meant when he said it would take ''some time'' to go through the declaration, he replied: ''It's anybody's guess. 'Some time' in Greek is any time from one day to 1,000 years.''
