

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; INSPECTOR ORDERS IRAQ TO DISMANTLE DISPUTED MISSILES
By Felicity Barringer With Michael R. Gordon
Feb. 22, 2003

A chief United Nations weapons inspector demanded today that Iraq start destroying -- within a week -- all its Al Samoud 2 missiles and any illegally imported engines designed for use in the rockets, which United Nations experts say exceed the allowed range of 92 miles.

The demand from the inspector, Hans Blix, with its blunt March 1 deadline, appeared to set the stage for a diplomatic showdown over the next two weeks that could determine whether Iraq faces war.

The United States and Britain continued today to press for a brief resolution -- to be presented next week -- that declares Iraq in breach of its disarmament obligations.

Should Iraq refuse or fail to destroy the short-range missile, the lack of action could be seen as lending credence to the American argument that Saddam Hussein has no intention of disarming.

In outlining his demands in a letter to Mr. Hussein's top weapons expert, Gen. Amir al-Saadi, Mr. Blix cited the findings of a panel of experts who met earlier this month to determine whether Iraq had violated United Nations bans on missile ranges.

Iraqi officials insist the missile will not exceed the proscribed range when the actual warhead and guidance equipment are mounted. They have offered to conduct test firings for the United States. Mr. Blix and missile experts have dismissed this argument, saying the missile has an inherent ability to fly well beyond the range limits and has done so in tests.

American diplomats had no public comment on the letter. But one diplomat said, ''We are very pleased,'' adding that it seemed unlikely that Iraq would destroy a system that it had spent heavily to build.

The Bush administration reported significant progress on another diplomatic front today, with officials saying that broad agreement was reached with Turkey on a $15 billion aid package expected to prompt Ankara to approve the use of Turkey as a base for American troops in case of a war with Iraq. [Page A8.]

The liquid-fueled Samoud missile is already deployed as part of Iraq's defense against a potential American-led invasion.

Iraq could use the missile against American forces or to retaliate against the Kurds. American intelligence officials believe it could carry chemical or biological warheads.

Iraq began to develop the missile after the Persian Gulf war in 1991. An early design was quickly identified as a serious problem by United Nations inspectors. They concluded that the missile, in its original design, would be able to carry so much fuel that it could exceed the range limit.

The United Nations warned the Iraqis not to build the missile, recalled Timothy McCarthy, a senior analyst at the Center for Nonproliferation Studies and former weapons inspector. Iraq said it would build a missile with a smaller diameter. But the United Nations has determined that the Samoud missiles Iraq is building are essentially based on the larger, prohibited design.

Mr. Blix's letter, which diplomats said was presented to the Iraqi envoy, Mohammed Aldouri, during an hourlong meeting late this afternoon, followed a day of meetings in which American and British diplomats tried to build support for their proposed Security Council resolution.

[On Saturday, the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, reacted to the letter, saying, ''We think all pending issues can be solved beteen the two parties without any pressure being exacted on them by certain powers,'' Reuters reported. Mr. Sabri spoke to reporters in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, where he was attending the Non-Aligned Movement summit meeting.]

At present, neither France, Russia nor China -- three permanent members of the Security Council -- have endorsed the idea of a second resolution and have urged giving Mr. Blix's inspectors more time to disarm Iraq peacefully.

American and British diplomats have argued that the language in the Nov. 8 resolution that launched the current weapons inspections -- and was passed by a unanimous 15-0 vote -- authorizes the use of force in the case of continued Iraqi failure to comply. Those who oppose this position argue that a variety of tests must be met to determine if such a failure has occurred.

Most diplomats have turned to Mr. Blix's office to specify those tests.

He is currently preparing a report on the progress of the weapons inspections, due by March 1. He is likely to appear before the Council to discuss it on March 7, giving Guinea, which takes over the rotating Security Council chairmanship on March 1, time to prepare for what is likely to be a crucial debate.

President Bush was planning to discuss the wording of the Council resolution and other diplomacy regarding Iraq with Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain at his ranch in Crawford, Tex. Spain is one of four Council members committed to a second resolution authorizing force if Iraq continues to rebuff the the Council's weapons demands.

France has made clear that if the resolution uses language that seems to authorize force -- such as declaring that ''serious consequences'' must come into play -- it would reject the resolution.

Without any new evidence, at least six Council members -- Mexico, Chile, Angola, Cameroon, Guinea and Pakistan -- have expressed grave doubts about supporting a resolution that could lead to military action.

At the moment, Mr. Blix's office is preparing two separate documents, one covering the progress of inspections for the last three months, and the second setting out about 30 remaining unresolved disarmament issues. These unresolved issues will be discussed on Monday and Tuesday, and likely reduced. They are expected to encompass such things as whether Iraq has revealed its stores of anthrax and other biological weapons and its chemical weapons, and whether Iraq has destroyed its banned missiles and allowed unfettered interviews with its scientists, United Nations officials said.

On Feb. 14, Mr. Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the head of the International Atomic Energy Commission, gave a positive enough account of Iraqi compliance to allow France and its partisans to argue that inspections were beginning to work and should continue.

In the ensuing week, none of the 11 Council members who argued for at least some further inspections budged from their stands, leaving the United States potentially at the wrong end of a lopsided vote.

A high-profile instance of Iraqi defiance would leave the pro-inspection arguments threadbare, making passage of a new resolution far easier.

But even without such a test case, American and British diplomats have been lobbying their colleagues on the Council, saying that they could not avoid the difficult choice of publicly sanctioning or opposing a war, and that the Council was in danger of leaving itself irrelevant if its members tried to duck the decision.
