

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Hardening His Tone, Hussein Challenges Inspectors and Talks of War Readiness
By Neil MacFarquhar
Jan. 7, 2003

President Saddam Hussein today accused the United Nations weapons inspectors of spying against Iraq in a belligerent speech in which he also declared the Iraqi people ready for any sacrifices required by another war.

Gone was the leader whose remarks broadcast a month ago cautioned patience with the renewed inspections. Back was a more bellicose, more familiar figure who used the occasion of his annual Army Day address to serve notice that Iraq is primed to fight.

''As we watch the hissing of snakes and barking of dogs accompanied by continued aggression in the north and south of the country,'' Mr. Hussein said, referring to the no-flight zones imposed after the Persian Gulf war, ''we act with the confidence of the assured whose actions are not hasty or confused.''

''We are prepared for anything, for any eventuality,'' he said in the 20-minute recorded speech that was broadcast repeatedly on Iraqi television, starting at 11 a.m. local time.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Mr. Hussein accused Washington of pressuring the weapons inspectors to overreach the goals of the Security Council resolution that set down the rules governing their return.

In their effort to substantiate Washington's lies about Iraq, the president said, the inspectors are not content with simply looking for the ''so-called weapons of mass destruction.'' No, he said, the inspection teams are collecting lists of Iraqi scientists, questioning employees, paying special attention to military camps and permitted military production, ''all or most of which constitute purely intelligence work.''

Hoping to avoid an expected attack by the United States, Iraq had agreed to accept the renewed and more intrusive weapons inspections required under Security Council Resolution 1441.

Baghdad says it has disbanded its nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs, and while it is still cooperating with the inspectors, Mr. Hussein's harsh remarks underscore a growing annoyance among Baath Party leaders that the process has not been the quick confirmation they had sought. Increasingly barbed comments by Iraqi officials indicate that they are cooperating through gritted teeth, wondering why they are stomaching the indignity of such inspections while the buildup of United States forces goes on, making war seem inevitable.

Since starting their work on Nov. 27, the inspectors have visited about 250 sites. Until now, Iraqi officials dealing with the inspectors have refrained from criticism because Washington has made it clear that even the slightest resistance could constitute the ''material breach'' of the resolution that could set off a war.
ADVERTISEMENT
The hostile language that Mr. Hussein unleashed today was reminiscent of the Iraqi attitude during the inspections from 1991 to 1998, when confrontations periodically led to American bombing raids on Iraq.

On Tuesday, the inspectors are scheduled to make their first use of the six helicopters -- three American and three Russian -- that have been delivered to the country. The helicopters are supposed to add an element of speed and surprise to distant inspections. The first sites likely to be visited will be in the western reaches of the country, Iraqi officials said, noting that their own helicopters would follow right behind.

In Vienna, Mohamed ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the chief of nuclear weapons inspections, said the inspections had not produced anything suspicious, no ''smoking gun'' indicating that Iraq still possessed chemical, biological or nuclear weapons. He cautioned, however, that at five weeks the process was still in its early stages.

Hans Blix, the chief inspector for biological and chemical weapons, and Dr. ElBaradei are due to brief to the Security Council on Thursday about the 12,000-page declaration that Iraq submitted a month ago. That meeting is likely to include some assessment of the inspections to date, but a more thorough presentation is scheduled for Jan. 27.

In the speech today, instead of rambling, extemporaneous remarks, the 65-year-old Iraqi president read from a prepared text as he laid out his vision of the crisis.

The United States wants to dominate the region's resources and redraw its borders, he said, growling that the enemy was trying to hide its true goals behind its ''hysterical hubbub and clamor.''

''Iraq is not the only target in this confusion,'' Mr. Hussein said, echoing the prevailing Arab view that Washington wants to seize the region's oil. ''The objective is rather to subject the Arab gulf area to a full, complete and physical occupation through which to achieve many goals.''
ADVERTISEMENT
It would allow Washington to control all military and oil shipping through the Arabian and Red Seas, he said, and suggested that talk of war helped the Bush administration distract Americans from what he called the near collapse of their economy in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks.

He said American actions were taken mainly at the behest of Israel, including distracting the world's attention from its treatment of the Palestinians.

Mr. Hussein has championed the Palestinian cause in the past, even saying that the road to Jerusalem ran through Kuwait after he occupied that country in 1990. Such remarks reverberate less in the wider Arab world today, although Arabs generally believe that the United States wants to defang Iraq because it is the one nation capable of challenging Israel.

In his speech, Mr. Hussein made repeated references to the sacrifices being made by the Palestinians in their fight, and suggested that Iraqis follow their example. The Iraqi leader has pledged $25,000 to the families of each suicide bomber.

Mr. Hussein said he hoped war could still be avoided, that nothing would make the Iraqi people happier, but said that because they were defending their homeland they could be assured victory. The government has been issuing supplemental food rations to help assuage concerns about any coming war.

''If anyone attempts to intimidate you, the people of Iraq, repel him and tell him that he is a small midget while we belong to a nation of glorious faith,'' said Mr. Hussein, wearing a dark suit and patterned tie and seated behind a bank of white flowers.

Mr. Hussein, despite the the Baath Party's avowed secularism, adopted a more pious tone after the Persian Gulf war, and the speech today brimmed with religious references. It started with a quote from the Koran in which God calls on the faithful to cut off the heads and hands of the infidels, and suggests that anyone who retreats from the enemy will end up in hell.
ADVERTISEMENT
Mr. Hussein appealed to God to take on Iraq's enemies: ''Smite them with your wrath and smash them with your destructive blows, for they are a group of criminals.''

He also suggested the Lord would stand in judgment of Iraq's actions. ''Allah does not like weaklings,'' Mr. Hussein said.
