
THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTELLIGENCE; Defectors Bolster U.S. Case Against Iraq, Officials Say
By Judith Miller
Jan. 24, 2003

Having concluded that international inspectors are unlikely to find tangible and irrefutable evidence that Iraq is hiding weapons of mass destruction, the Bush administration is preparing its own assessment that will rely heavily on evidence from Iraqi defectors, according to senior administration officials.

Former Iraqi scientists, military officers and contractors have provided American intelligence agencies with a portrait of Saddam Hussein's secret programs to develop and conceal chemical, biological and nuclear weapons that is starkly at odds with the findings so far of the United Nations weapons inspectors.

In a speech in New York yesterday, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul D. Wolfowitz made a rare public acknowledgment of the administration's reliance on defectors. He said, for instance, that defectors had told the United States government about Iraq's construction of mobile units to produce biological weapons.

''Today, we know from multiple sources that Saddam has ordered that any scientist who cooperates during interviews will be killed, as well as their families,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said. ''Furthermore, we know that scientists are being tutored on what to say to the U.N. inspectors and that Iraqi intelligence officers are posing as scientists to be interviewed by the inspectors.'' This was the first time the administration had accused Iraq of specific acts of intimidation against its scientists.

Elsewhere, Mr. Wolfowitz said pointedly, ''For a great body of what we need to know, we are very dependent on traditional methods of intelligence -- that is to say, human beings who are either deliberately or inadvertently communicating to us.''

The administration has been offered information from a growing number of Iraqis who have fled in the last 18 months, officials said. But the number deemed credible is small, around a dozen or so, officials said. The three or four thought to have the most valuable firsthand information have been placed in a witness protection program and offered asylum.

Nevertheless, there are deep divisions in Washington over the value of information from defectors. The Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency has been the most receptive, saying that defectors are critical to penetrating Iraq's deceptive practices. The C.I.A. has often been dismissive of the defectors and questioned their credibility, according to administration officials.

Despite the reservations, the White House asked administration intelligence analysts last week to use the information from the defectors as part of a ''bill of particulars'' that the administration hopes will convince skeptical allies and the American public that Iraq's behavior warrants military action, the officials said. In addition, they said, it may be incorporated into President Bush's State of the Union address on Jan. 28.

Last week, the administration began sharing information from defectors with the inspectors, but with trepidation, officials said. Given the past actions of the Iraqi government, there is reason to believe that the families and friends of the defectors would be murdered if their identities were revealed, the officials said.

Intelligence officials said that some of the most valuable information has come from Adnan Ihsan Saeed al-Haideri, a contractor who fled Iraq in the summer of 2001. He later told American officials that chemical and biological weapons laboratories were hidden beneath hospitals and inside presidential palaces.

Mr. Haideri was relocated anonymously to a small town in Virginia. Administration officials and experts on Iraq said members of his family in Iraq had disappeared, and there were fears they were executed as a message to potential defectors.

Because of the debate in Washington over defectors' credibility, Mr. Haideri was not interviewed by American intelligence agents until months after he left Iraq. Richard Perle, chief of the Defense Policy Board, which advises the Pentagon, and a leading hard-liner on Iraq, said that until recently, C.I.A. officials were so hostile to defectors brought out of Iraq by the Iraqi National Congress, the umbrella opposition group, that they refused to interview them and even tried to discredit their information. ''But ultimately, the flow of information was so vital and so overwhelming that they could no longer ignore it,'' Mr. Perle said.

David Albright, the president of the Institute for Science and International Security in Washington and a former United Nations weapons inspector, agreed that scientists who fled not only Iraq but other countries of concern to Washington have often been badly treated. ''They are very jaded,'' Mr. Albright said of C.I.A. officials. ''They think all defectors are deceiving them, because so often they are. So they often don't try hard enough to distinguish between those who have really valuable information and the scam artists.''

A senior C.I.A. official, speaking on condition that he not be identified, said the C.I.A had ''never refused to interview a credible defector.''

Complicating intelligence efforts is a flood of all-too-eager informants who have left Iraq as war seems more likely, officials said. These individuals seek to provide information for a price, or in exchange for asylum. Officials said intelligence analysts have spent hundreds of hours vetting such people. Officials fear that some of them might be ''disinformation'' agents, people sent deliberately by Iraq to induce Washington to make a bogus charge that Baghdad could triumphantly disprove.

The challenge of establishing defectors' credibility is illustrated by the case of Abdel Jabal Karim Ashur al-Bedani, whom American intelligence analysts interviewed within the last three months, officials said.

Mr. Bedani, born in 1959 in Basra, told the Defense Intelligence Agency that he fled Iraq in August after 19 years in the Iraqi military. He claimed to have been in charge of the transport of weapons materials for Iraq's Military Industrial Commission and he identified several locations where he said chemical weapons were stored, said officials familiar with his debriefings.

He also said that Iraq had in recent months moved unconventional weapons and precursor materials to Syria -- a claim that American and Israeli intelligence said in interviews was backed up by information from other intelligence sources.

But D.I.A. officials who interviewed Mr. Bedani found much of his information unpersuasive, officials said. ''As a source, he was marginal,'' one official said, explaining that many of his claims were exaggerated and ill-informed. The agency was no longer talking to him, the official said, and Mr. Bedani has not been offered asylum. Iraqi dissidents said they, too, no longer trust Mr. Bedani, whom they say is living in Syria. He could not be reached for comment.

The defectors also have had an impact within the administration. Details provided by Mr. Haideri, the Iraqi contractor, were partly responsible for the shift in attitude within the intelligence community toward Iraqi émigrés, several officials agreed. His interviews with the Defense Intelligence Agency. ultimately resulted in dozens of highly credible reports on Iraqi weapons-related activity and purchases, officials said.
