

A NATION AT WAR: MILITARY COMMENTATORS; Iraq War Keeps Generals Busy, Even the Ones Who Have Retired
By John H. Cushman Jr.
March 25, 2003

Old soldiers, it turns out, don't just fade away not when a war is being carried live on CNN, MSNBC, Fox News and the broadcast networks.

Instead, a whole constellation of retired one-, two-, three- and four-star generals -- including many who led the recent wars in Afghanistan, Kosovo and the Persian Gulf -- can be seen night and day across the television firmament, navigation aids for viewers lost in a narrative that can be foggier than war itself.

The generals bring a new, deep perspective to the coverage of the war. Many of them led the same units that are fighting in Iraq -- or commanded, trained or shared barracks and beers with the current commanders. At their best, they can introduce a laconic, pithy sang-froid that smooths out the sometimes frantic reporting of television journalists at the front, who tend to see the war through the narrow lens of immediacy.

''If things haven't gone exactly according to script, they've gone according to plan,'' Lt. Gen. Greg Newbold, formerly of the Marines, said on ABC News last Friday. He should know; until late last year he was helping to draw up those plans as the director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

But the generals' performances raise some questions, including how much they really know and whether they are disclosing more than they should. Some receive occasional briefings from the Pentagon, but like most reporters, they stay current by checking with their friends in the military and studying all the public information they can gather.

On the other hand, their evident sympathies with the current commanders, not to mention their respect for the military and immersion in its doctrines, sometimes seem to immunize them to the self-imposed skepticism of the news organizations that now employ them.

Rarely, unless pressed, do the generals bluntly criticize the conduct of the war, a detailed review of their recent remarks discloses. Instead, they tend gravely to point out the timeless risks of combat.

In the early hours of this morning, though, after the sharpest fighting to that point of the war far resulted in scores killed, wounded or captured, Gen. Wesley K. Clark, an Army retiree who was the top NATO commander during the Kosovo war, questioned whether the Central Command had committed enough soldiers.

''I would have preferred more forces there,'' General Clark said, noting that three divisions expected to join the war had not yet arrived.

''Our boots-on-the-ground strength is low,'' he continued. ''The command believes they can do the job, and I don't know the details, but I trust their judgment. But if you ask me, as an old soldier, I like to have an insurance policy.''

More typical was a description by Gen. Wayne A. Downing, a former Army leader of the Special Operations Command and a gulf war commander in 1991, of Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the Iraq war's overall regional commander.

''Tommy started off as an enlisted helicopter door gunner in Vietnam,'' General Downing said, rattling off the story of his old comrade's career as if by rote. ''He's not going to go down there and mess with his people. Not only is Tommy comfortable and well liked by his superiors, which a lot of people are, but Tommy hasn't made his money by looking up. He's made his money by looking down.''

When it comes to explaining the nuts and bolts of an operation, the technical details of weapons, the decisions facing American and British commanders, the generals often perform reasonably well.

Even more interesting, if more speculative, are their musings on what the Iraqi high command might be thinking.

''Let's give the Iraqis some credit,'' said Gen. Michael C. Short, retired from the Air Force, in a discussion on MSNBC about the Iraqis' habit of blasting the skies of Baghdad with antiaircraft guns. ''Some of them are solid military professionals. They will know where their command and control targets are. They will have looked around 360 degrees and say, 'Where will the cruise missile have to go to get to this target? We'll put guns in that area.' ''

Lt. Gen. Bernard E. Trainor, retired from the Marines, who after leaving the joint staff became a military analyst for The New York Times and now appears on MSNBC, pondered the Iraqi command's mindset as American forces neared Baghdad today.

''If he moves, we kill him; if he stays put, we kill him,'' General Trainor said. ''And regardless of what they're told to do over the network, whatever is left of the command and control, unless it comes down to using chemical weapons, then the rest of it is just ancillary. If this is going to be the communication of red telephone, if you will, to tell people to launch chemical weapons -- and we're reaching that point in the operation -- if they're going to use their stuff, they'd better start thinking about it, because pretty soon we're in downtown Baghdad.''

General Clark, leaning over a big table in CNN's studio and using a long stick to move figurines around a map of the theater, is careful to note that the movements he describes -- or predicts -- are only approximations of the actual situation.

''The other military analysts and I continue to hear feedback that people are still concerned that somehow we're giving away plans,'' he said the other night. ''And you know, I just want to reassure everybody that we're very sensitive to that, that none of us have seen those plans. And we wouldn't ask our military colleagues about them. We're hypersensitive to the safety of the soldiers.

''And so, we're very careful about what we say,'' he added. ''There's a whole lot going on in this battlefield that we're not reporting, not talking about, not speculating on.''

General Clark, whose meetings with Democratic activists have fueled speculation that he wants to run for president, may be the smoothest and most urbane of the former generals to have turned, as Churchill might have put it, from war-war to jaw-jaw.

If General Clark were ever to run for office, his prolonged exposure on television during the war could only boost his name recognition, and it may be that his political instincts mellow the tone that a more pugnacious commentator might provide.

For other generals, the fame that comes with the studio lights may not match the fortune. Even the less prominent ones, who are not under long-term contract, can make $500 per appearance.

To a man, they emphasize the gravity of what the military is up to in Iraq. ''It's not entertainment,'' General Clark said.
