

A NATION AT WAR: THE SECRETARY OF STATE; Powell Sees Major Role For U.N. in Postwar Iraq
By Steven R. Weisman
March 29, 2003

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said today that opposition around the world toward the war in Iraq would pose a significant challenge for the United States in the future, and that he never expected it would be as easy as some had thought to break the hold of Saddam Hussein's government.

Mr. Powell said that to counter global antiwar sentiments, the United States would seek a major role for the United Nations in a democratic postwar Iraq, move more ''aggressively'' to restart the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and reach out to ''friends with whom we may have been having some difficulty.''

''Once we have been successful and we have prevailed, and people realize that we have come to provide a better life for the people of Iraq,'' Mr. Powell added, ''I think you can turn this rather quickly.''

The secretary's comments came in a wide-ranging interview, much of it focused on his reflections about the war and the comments of some commanders and analysts that the current level of forces was not sufficient to win the war.

Mr. Powell, a former Army general who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has propounded the so-called ''Powell doctrine'' that war must be waged with overwhelming, or at least decisive, force. Asked whether the United States had fielded such a level of force, Mr. Powell demurred.

''I think that they will bring decisive force to bear,'' he said. ''But what I don't want to do is start commenting on the ups and downs, the ins and outs, of the daily battle.''

But he explained that in anticipation of an adverse situation after the first week, the Pentagon had ''queued up lots of forces in anticipation that you may not know in the first week or so what the total requirement would be, and that's why there are forces that are still now flowing into the theater.''

The secretary declined to say whether he had taken part in the debate with the president over what the size of the force should be.

''I don't discuss options that were presented to the president -- which were accepted, which were discarded,'' he said. ''I defend the president's positions and decisions.''

In discussing the future of postwar Iraq, Mr. Powell provided new details on the administration's thinking.

His pledge for a big role by the United Nations echoed Prime Minister Tony Blair at his joint news conference with President Bush at Camp David on Thursday. Mr. Bush did not mention the United Nations, and some in the administration make no secret of their opposition to its playing a role, particularly in any reconstruction of Iraq.

''The United Nations has made it clear, through the secretary general, they do not want to become the new governing authority of Iraq,'' Mr. Powell said. ''But they have a role to play in many different ways.'' He said the United Nations was needed to provide ''international legitimacy'' to the occupation.

With a mischievous grin and a linguistic bow to France -- the major foe of the war -- the secretary then offered two metaphors for what he said Washington wanted.

First, he said, the United Nations would serve as a chapeau -- the French word for hat -- conferring broad legitimacy and endorsement of Iraq's postwar operations, including some of its reconstruction. Second, it would serve as a vessel, receiving funds from aid groups and those financing Iraq's reconstruction.

As a practical matter, Mr. Powell said, without some kind of international legitimacy Iraq under an American- and British-led occupation would not be able to produce currency that would be recognized by other countries or sell oil on the international market.

On the other hand, he made clear that the military would have to be in charge, at least at first, so long as the situation in Iraq remained unstable.

''We're the ones who are doing the fighting and the liberating with our friends in the coalition,'' he said. ''We believe we have an important role to play and to some extent drive this process until such time as there is an Iraqi government that is functioning and running.''

On other subjects, Mr. Powell took exception to many accounts suggesting that the administration's so-called preemption strategy -- contained in its National Security Strategy published last year -- meant that Mr. Bush might use or threaten force against North Korea and Iran as the next stage of its policies.

Noting that newspapers had written much about this strategy as guiding the Iraq war, and possible future confrontations, Mr. Powell said, ''Give me the evidence for this point of view.'' Just because there is a war with Iraq, ''that doesn't mean we're going to a war footing as soon as Iraq is dealt with,'' he said.

''The president has available to him lots of tools, and the tool you use is not always a hammer,'' he added.

Mr. Powell disputed news accounts of the administration's actions once again when he said it was wrong to say that the effort to try to get a second Security Council resolution authorizing use of force against Iraq was a mistake or a setback.

Rather, he said, the effort had been closer to succeeding than was generally acknowledged, but the United States let some countries willing to support the American position off the hook once it became clear that France was going to kill the resolution with a veto.

''When we looked at that, and realized the position this was putting some of our friends in,'' he said, ''and have them show their hand and still lose, at that point it was sensible not to do that. That's diplomacy sometimes.''

He also said the effort to get a second resolution enabled Mr. Blair to quiet a revolt within his party over going to war.

In talking about all the predictions of quick success in Iraq -- whether from surrender, popular uprising or resignation by Mr. Hussein -- he seemed more reflective than irritated over the many predictions that the war would go more easily than it has.

''You know, you may have to go and take a census of everybody, but I had no illusions,'' he said. ''We all hoped for the best, but you plan for not the best.'' Reminded that some had talked about the war being a cakewalk or rout, the secretary said:

''You can search my speakings and writings for years, I never used expressions or terms or words like that. War is not a game. And it's not a slogan. These are young men and women who are being sent to their . . . to their fate.''
