

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Kurdish Leader Is Assassinated In Militant Raid
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 10, 2003

The Islamic group Ansar al-Islam, which the United States calls the link between Baghdad and Al Qaeda, assassinated a minister of the Kurdish parliament and two other government officials on Saturday night and seized two hostages whose fate remained unknown, witnesses and Kurdish security officials said today.

A team of gunmen, who Kurdish officials said were able to get close to the minister because they were masquerading as peace negotiators, also killed three civilians and wounded 12 other people in the northern village of Qamesh Tapa. Among the injured was an 8-year-old girl shot in the forehead. Doctors said she was likely to die.

The attack was the third assassination attempt by Islamists against Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq since 2001 and came as the United States military is taking steps to enlist the Kurds in a possible war against Saddam Hussein.

In previous attacks, Islamic militants here killed the governor of one Kurdish region and narrowly missed killing one of the two prime ministers in the Kurdish zone. The killings and abductions on Saturday shut down the government here today.

Officials packed an enormous funeral at Martyrs Hill, a cemetery on the city's edge, and attended memorial services throughout the afternoon at which they remembered the assassinated minister, Shawkat Hajji Mushir, as a nearly perfect example of a life sacrificed for the Kurdish autonomy struggle.

Mr. Mushir was a founding member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the party that controls the eastern Kurdish zone in Iraq, and a close confidante of the Jalal Talabani, the party leader. He had earned a reputation for courage and battlefield savvy as a commander in struggles against Mr. Hussein and rival Kurds.

[In Washington, the State Department said it had no immediate comment on the killing of Mr. Mushir.]

In an interview last month, Mr. Talabani described Mr. Mushir as a quintessential grass-roots guerrilla, saying he was one of seven fighters who began with two rifles among them, but, through daring and organizational skill, gathered more men and arms and became commanders in the fight against Mr. Hussein.

''They were our heroes,'' Mr. Talabani said. The region is now out of Mr. Hussein's hands, having been freed in an uprising in 1991.

In recent years Mr. Mushir had become an emissary in negotiations to reconcile with tribes who had once backed Mr. Hussein, to end the Kurdish civil war in the 1990's and to seek better relations with Islamists, who have gained a foothold here.

After Mr. Mushir's burial today, Sadi Ahmed Pire, another party leader, called him ''a knight of peace.'' It was his longing for peace that apparently led to his death.

Ansar al-Islam, a Taliban-like party with several hundred fighters, occupies a bit of land near the Iranian border and has engaged in war with the Kurdish government since 2001.

In a presentation last week to the United Nations Security Council, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell portrayed the group as an affiliate of Al Qaeda that harbors fighters from Afghanistan and manufactures toxins for terrorist use. Mr. Powell said the group ran a terrorist training center and poison factory supported by Abu Mussab al-Zarqawi, who he said was an Osama bin Laden lieutenant. The United States contends that Mr. Zarqawi has operated a terrorist network from Baghdad since the Taliban were ousted from Afghanistan.

Ansar denies those allegations. In an interview at the Ansar compound on Saturday, Muhammad Hassan, an Ansar spokesman, said that the group did not operate any poison factories and that it had no outside affiliations. ''I say the truth,'' he said. ''We have not any relations with any country.''

No matter its affiliations, the group is of considerable worry to Kurds. In recent weeks, Kurdish security officials said, an Ansar faction had notified Mr. Mushir that about 120 militants hoped to defect. It was a sizable number, perhaps a fifth of Ansar's military strength.

Mr. Mushir met with an Ansar delegation at least two other times to discuss the possibility of mass defection, once in the village Sirwan, which is under Kurdish government control, and in Beyara, where Ansar has a headquarters, people familiar with the negotiations said.

Another meeting, they said, was arranged for Saturday night in Qamesh Tapa, a short drive from the front lines and in an area under Kurdish government control.

Kurdish officials said he was deceived. The meetings were not meant as a step toward peace, but to lure a prominent Kurd to his death.

Mr. Mushir appeared to have been completely tricked, witnesses and Kurdish security officials said. As a gesture of good faith he sent two other Kurds -- Zahir Tawfiq and Fouad Mam Agha -- to a small village near the front, where they were to sit with Ansar fighters as a guarantee of the Ansar team's safety.

Moreover, Mr. Mushir traveled with light security, armed himself with only a pistol, and chose to meet in the quiet setting of a civilian home.

He arrived early Saturday night at the house, accompanied by Muhammad Tawfiq Galali, the director of security of the nearby district of Halabja. The three Ansar negotiators arrived about 8:30 p.m. One sat inside with him and Mr. Galali. The others waited outside.

After about 45 minutes, Mr. Galali stepped from the room, and as Mr. Mushir was writing a letter they had discussed in the session, the Ansar negotiator picked up a Kalashnikov rifle and shot him in the head, the senior security official said.

Almost simultaneously, the official said, the Ansar gunmen outside shot his guards. Mr. Mushir's killer, whom the security official identified as Ali Tezhia, made his way outside, and the three fighters then lobbed grenades toward the house and fired their rifles through a long window.

Inside were men, women and children. ''I saw the bullets coming in, hitting everybody,'' Salih Hassan, the owner of the house, said today as he lay in a hospital bed here, shot through the left calf. ''We all tried to seek a place to hide.''

The victims crowded hospitals here today. Three were severely wounded. Among them was Mr. Galali, who was shot in the right eye and suffered extensive abdominal injuries, and Daroon Fazil, 8, who was struck by a bullet in the forehead. She was in a coma, breathing fitfully.

Among the dead were Daroon's mother, shot through the neck, as well as two senior security officials and one of Mr. Hassan's sons.

The security official said the assassins escaped on foot, reaching a car they had left at the village of Girdi Go. Simultaneously, the two Kurds, offered as a guarantee to Ansar, disappeared.
