

THREATS AND RESPONSES: CAMP DAVID; Blair, Meeting With Bush, Fully Endorses U.S. Plans For Ending Iraqi Threat
By David E. Sanger
Sept. 8, 2002

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain today fully endorsed President Bush's drive to destroy Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, declaring at the opening of a meeting at Camp David that ''the policy of inaction is not a policy we can responsibly subscribe to.''

Speaking with reporters at the start of their talks, Mr. Blair became the first European leader to side so completely with Mr. Bush, a position that carries considerable political risk in Britain, where skepticism about military action in Iraq is running high.

But Mr. Blair said the two nations' strategy for confronting President Saddam Hussein of Iraq ''mobilizes the maximum support, but does so on the basis of removing a threat that the United Nations itself has determined is a threat to the whole of the world.''

As the two leaders appeared in open collars and blazers this afternoon at the presidential retreat in the Cactoctin Mountains, they both cited recent satellite photographs showing unexplained building activity at an Iraqi nuclear installation. While some intelligence experts doubt that Mr. Hussein would place a new nuclear installation in such an obvious place, Mr. Blair said today that it showed that ''there is a real issue that has to be tackled here.''

Mr. Bush referred to evidence from a decade ago, after the Persian Gulf war, that Mr. Hussein was ''six months away'' from obtaining a nuclear weapon, and he referred to the Iraqi leader at a ''tyrant'' who had to be removed from power because he is ''unstable.''

In his remarks today, Mr. Blair did not specify the removal of Mr. Hussein as a a goal, and that was notable given the European criticism of Mr. Bush for calling for a change of leadership whether or not Iraq complies with United Nations resolutions.

In a speech next Thursday to the United Nations, Mr. Bush is widely expected to call for the organization to enforce the 1991 cease-fire arrangement with Iraq, which mandates complete disarmament of all weapons of mass destruction and sharp limits on Iraq's missile force.

While he will urge the organization to act ''to preserve its own credibility,'' in the words of a senior administration official, Mr. Bush is also expected to make clear that if necessary he and Mr. Blair will take whatever steps are necessary to fully enforce that disarmament if the United Nations fails to act.

In an interview this week, Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, said, ''The burden of proof is not on the U.S.; it is on Saddam Hussein, to show that the elimination of weapons of mass destruction has taken place.'' Something similar to that phrase, officials say, is likely to appear in Mr. Bush's speech.

''We have always got to act lawfully, and that is what we will do,'' Mr. Blair told reporters on his flight from Britain, according to British press reports.

In a sign of the continuing internal administration struggle over how to deal with Iraq and the diplomacy surrounding it, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld withdrew a long article he had prepared for Sunday's issue of The Washington Post. The article defended the concept of unilateral, pre-emptive action by the United States against a potential foe armed with weapons of mass destruction.

According to The Post, which wrote about the withdrawal in today's issue, the Pentagon said ''the timing is not right'' for the article. But administration officials said they had feared that Mr. Rumsfeld's strong language would undercut the president's effort to convince allies that he is consulting them before taking any action.

Mr. Rumsfeld was not at Camp David for today's talks, nor was Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, who has internally argued in favor of trying again to force arms inspections through the United Nations. Vice President Dick Cheney and Ms. Rice were at the Camp David session.

Officials would not discuss the diplomatic and military strategies that Mr. Bush and Mr. Blair were reviewing, but a senior administration official preparing for the meeting said ''one active idea'' was that Britain rather than the United States would introduce a resolution at the United Nations to enforce the terms of the cease-fire Iraq signed in 1991.

Also included in the agenda of today's meeting, an official said, was a discussion of whether it would be militarily feasible to conduct what Washington now refers to as ''coercive inspections'' -- an inspection team backed up by air and land forces that could destroy potential weapons sites and be transformed into an invasion force if necessary.

''There are a number of options we're exploring, and coercive inspections are among them,'' a senior official said just before Mr. Blair arrived at Camp David by helicopter this afternoon.

Other than Britain, almost all the other European and Asian allies have said they oppose a confrontation absent evidence that Iraq will imminently obtain a nuclear weapon. Today Mr. Bush sidestepped a question about what other nations are willing to confront Mr. Hussein, but insisted that he was not alone.

He cited the Clinton administration's declaration in 1998, supported by Congress, that bringing about ''regime change'' in Iraq would be the policy of the United States, though in private Mr. Bush's aides disparage his predecessor for not acting on that commitment.

''A lot of people understand that this man has defied every U.N. resolution,'' Mr. Bush said, adding that there were 16 of them. ''A lot of people understand he holds weapons of mass destruction. A lot of people understand he has invaded two countries. A lot of people understand he's gassed his own people. A lot of people understand he is unstable. So we've got a lot of support.''

Mr. Blair, walking the fine line of supporting Mr. Bush but trying to bring his reluctant European neighbors with him, argued today that the threat was not just to the United States. ''If these weapons are developed and used, there is no way that any conflict Saddam initiated using these weapons would not have a direct implication on the interests of Britain,'' he said.

Andrew Card, the White House chief of staff, attended the Camp David talks, as did Karen Hughes, the former presidential counselor who is helping draft his speeches for Sept. 11 in New York and Sept. 12 at the United Nations, and Dan Bartlett, the director of communications at the White House.

After speaking to reporters, Mr. Bush and Mr. Blair boarded a golf cart, which Mr. Bush drove to the Laurel cabin, where the meeting took place. Ms. Rice drove another golf cart, giving a ride to Sir Christopher Meyer, the British ambassador.
