

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS; WEAPON INSPECTOR ASKS U.S. TO SHARE SECRET IRAQ DATA
By Julia Preston
Dec. 7, 2002

Hans Blix, a leader of the United Nations weapon inspections in Iraq, today parried the Bush administration's prodding of him to be more aggressive, saying he had received no official criticism from American officials. But he called on the United States to share secret intelligence to help in the search for Iraqi arms sites.

Though administration officials have demanded for days that the inspectors pick up the pace and forcefulness of their work, Mr. Blix said he heard only ''very supporting words'' from the United States and other nations in a closed Security Council meeting here today.

But he noted, in comments to reporters after the session, that only the inspectors had the authority to look inside potential Iraqi arms facilities, and he appealed to Washington -- with just a hint of impatience -- to give him better information about where to look.

Mr. Blix said his team was preparing to ask for private interviews with Iraqi arms scientists, as administration officials have urged. But he said he had not yet decided whether to use new powers he was given by the Council, at Washington's insistence, to take the experts and their families out of the country, and suggested that that approach could create misunderstandings with Iraq.

''I have said that we are not going to abduct anybody and we're not serving as a defection agency,'' Mr. Blix said.

Iraq confirmed today that it would turn over a voluminous declaration of its arms programs to the weapons inspectors late Saturday in Baghdad. The deadline for the declaration, set by Resolution 1441, is Sunday.

The Council decided that the declaration, which is expected to run more than 10,000 pages, would initially remain secret and in the hands of the weapons inspectors, so they can screen it for any information about Iraq's arms programs that could be used by other nations or by terrorists to build weapons.

''The initial attitude of the Council is that no one should have access to anything that could be used for proliferation,'' Mr. Blix said. His team is expected to receive and review Iraq's documents on chemical and biological weapons and long-range missiles, while the International Atomic Energy Agency, based in Vienna, will analyze the nuclear declaration.

Mr. Blix said he had learned from Iraq that the declaration will include new data about its past nuclear programs and about materials and equipment Iraq has obtained that could be used for civilian purposes or to make illegal weapons.

Under the procedure established today, neither the United States nor any other Security Council nation will see any part of the declaration until the United Nations arms teams have purged sensitive passages, which the inspectors will keep in their confidential files.

Once again today, Iraqi officials denied that they had any prohibited weapons. They said the declaration would show how they had eliminated weapons they had in the past.

''Everything we had has been destroyed, and we have no intention to do that again,'' said Mohammed A. Aldouri, the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations. ''Iraq is clean of any kind of mass-destruction weapons.''

Diplomats pointed out in the meeting that the Security Council is the world's highest authority in enforcing the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and other conventions barring chemical and biological weapons. These pacts include specific terms controlling the release of information that could be used to make prohibited weapons.

Past Iraqi arms declarations were given to United Nations weapons inspectors but were not distributed to the Security Council or released to the public. Council diplomats worried today that receiving Iraq's new declaration unfiltered might constitute a violation, since virtually all documents that reach the Council sooner or later leak to the press and the public.

''We don't want to provide any cookbooks,'' a United Nations official said. Past Iraqi declarations provided extensive and highly detailed technical information about how Iraq said it made and destroyed chemical weapons.

Mr. Blix seemed his usual jovial self after the meeting, joking about the enormous document he is to receive. But he betrayed a twinge of frustration when he was asked about the stream of commentary from Washington that he had gotten off to a slow start, even though the inspections began just over a week ago.

''Of course we would like to have as much information from any member state as to evidence they may have on weapons of mass destruction, and, in particular, sites,'' Mr. Blix said. ''Because we are inspectors, we can go to sites. They may be listening to what's going on and they may have lots of other sources of information. But we can go to the sites legitimately and legally.''

So far, Mr. Blix has been getting contradictory messages from Washington, United Nations officials said. On one hand, administration officials are pressing him to work faster and send out more inspectors to more places to undermine Baghdad's ability to conceal any hidden programs. At the same time, Washington has been holding back its intelligence, waiting to see what Iraq will say in its declaration.

Under the terms of Resolution 1441, if the United States can show that Iraq has omitted any significant information about a prohibited weapons program, Baghdad will be in ''material breach'' of the resolution, and Washington can go to war to make it disarm.

''We want to have recommendations from member governments about what they suggest to do, and we listen to all of them,'' Mr. Blix said. But he added: ''We have to act on behalf of the whole Council. We're grateful for recommendations, but we are, I've said before, in nobody's pocket.''

United States officials here confirmed that they refrained from criticizing Mr. Blix before the Council today.

''We think Dr. Blix and his team have done a very good job,'' an American official said. ''It really depends on Iraq's cooperation.''

Mr. Blix gave an upbeat but cautiously limited assessment of the inspections so far.

''There have been no impediments placed in our way,'' he said. ''We have had prompt access to sites all around.'' But he said he would not use the word ''cooperation'' yet, because it is too early in the inspections process.

Mr. Blix said he would report on his ''first glance'' at the contents of Iraq's declaration next Tuesday, when he is scheduled to meet for lunch with representatives of all 15 Council nations and Secretary General Kofi Annan. The declaration is expected to arrive on paper, and vast portions of it will be in Arabic, so it will have to be translated by language experts with high-level security clearance.
