

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS; U.S. Weighs How Serious an Arms-Violation Charge to Make Against Baghdad
By Eric Schmitt With Julia Preston
Dec. 19, 2002

As top officials of the Bush administration wrestled today with the question of whether to declare that Iraq had committed a ''material breach'' of Security Council resolutions, Pentagon officials said they have given preliminary approval for sending as many as 50,000 troops to the Persian Gulf region, a move that would allow President Bush to order an attack against Saddam Hussein by late January.

The buildup, which would begin shortly after the first of the year, would include mobilizing reserves and deploying additional warplanes, tanks and other equipment. It would roughly double the American forces now in the region.

In London, Prime Minister Tony Blair said Britain's Defense Ministry had begun a ''contingency deployment'' of forces toward the gulf in anticipation of possible action against Iraq.

''After the first of the year, you'll see a buildup and continued pressure on Iraq,'' said one senior American military official.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of American forces in the gulf, was in Washington today for war planning meetings with Mr. Bush and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

The deployment would be necessary if Mr. Bush determines that Iraq had committed a material breach of United Nations resolutions that ban Baghdad from seeking to acquire weapons of mass destruction, a violation which could be the basis for war. Senior administration officials announced that they had found glaring omissions and deficiencies in the 12,000-page weapons declaration that Iraq handed to the United Nations on Dec. 7.

But after a morning meeting with President Bush, some officials said they were weighing the alternative of announcing on Thursday that Iraq had committed a ''material omission.'' Such language is less likely to precipitate immediate war.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and other senior officials stressed after the meeting with Mr. Bush that the United States would continue to work through the United Nations and support the weapons inspections under way in Iraq. American officials also said consultations were in progress with other Council nations to determine whether they would be antagonized if the United States declared that Iraq was in material breach of the resolution.

Mr. Powell and the American ambassador to the United Nations, John D. Negroponte, are expected to make statements on Thursday providing Washington's first detailed assessment of the Iraqi declaration. They will describe the document as one more example of how Iraq has resisted cooperating fully with the inspections, even while allowing the inspectors to go where they please in the country, officials said.

The decision to denounce the Iraqi weapons statement as the most serious form of breach had been accepted earlier this week by the State Department and the National Security Council, administration officials said. But the discussion with the president persuaded officials to weigh a less serious alternative, they said.

Another persuasive factor came from Hans Blix, a leader of the United Nations weapons teams, who said on Tuesday that he intended to inform the Security Council that he, too, had found gaps in Iraq's documents.

Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief atomic weapons inspector, will brief the Council on Thursday morning for the first time on their preliminary evaluation of the Iraqi declaration.

White House officials indicated that their decision not to push the pace of the confrontation with Baghdad was tactical, driven by timing rather than any belief that the omissions did not amount to a legal justification for war. Mr. Bush's advisers concluded, one official said, that it would be unwise to appear to be driving headlong toward a conflict ''before our allies are ready.''

In discussion with other Council nations in recent days, American diplomats determined that there was little support for treating the flaws in the declaration as sufficient grounds to trigger the clauses in Resolution 1441, the weapons inspection measure, that could result in a declaration of war.

But American officials increasingly regarded the shortcomings of the Iraqi declaration as so obvious that Iraq's defiance of the Council would become clear without Washington's having to insist too heavily on it.

The American analysis ''shows problems with the declaration, gaps, omissions and all of this is troublesome,'' Secretary Powell said today. He added that the United States was not encouraged that Iraq had ''gotten the message or will cooperate based on what we have seen so far in the declaration, but we will stay within the U.N. process.''

''The president made it clear he wanted to work with the U.N. and the international community,'' Mr. Powell said at a brief press appearance with leaders of the European Union.

Foreign Secretary Jack Straw of Britain, Washington's closest ally on the Council, was blunt in his appraisal of President Saddam Hussein's weapons documents.

''This will fool nobody,'' Mr. Straw said. ''If Saddam persists in this obvious falsehood, it will become clear he has rejected the pathway to peace laid down in Resolution 1441.''

Mr. Straw said the declaration failed to account for weapons of mass destruction described by United Nations weapons inspectors in 1999, in their last report. He said the omissions included ''large quantities of nerve agent, chemical precursors and munitions.''

Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said the United States would ''proceed in a deliberative way,'' consulting with allies while encouraging inspectors to ''fully use every tool'' granted to them under the resolution.

That phraseology appeared to be code for interviewing Iraqi scientists outside of Iraq's territory. The United States is still pressing Mr. Blix to use his authority under Resolution 1441 to do so, though United Nations officials have questioned whether this approach would be more useful than confidential interviews inside the country.

At the United Nations, several Council members were uneasy about what they saw as pressure from Washington to sway their views before they have heard from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei. The 10 nonpermanent Council members only received their edited copies of the Iraqi declaration on Tuesday evening, and many capitals were only getting their first look at the vast stacks of paper today.
ADVERTISEMENT
Syria announced today that it would not accept its copy of the document, but would return it to the United Nations to protest the way its distribution was handled.

The United States surprised many Council members two weeks ago by persuading Colombia, a close American ally that holds the Council presidency this month, to distribute unedited copies of the declaration to the five permanent members right away, instead of waiting until the 10 rotating members could receive their edited copies. The nonpermanent 10, which are not nuclear powers, received a version from which passages containing nuclear weapons information were cut.
