

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITARY; Allied Plan Would Encourage Iraqis Not to Fight
By Michael R. Gordon
March 11, 2003

American and British commanders say they are devising a strategy intended to defeat the Iraqi military without completely destroying it, and to limit damage to Iraq's infrastructure.

Lt. Gen. David McKiernan, the commander of allied land forces if the United States leads an invasion of Iraq, said he and other commanders were working out procedures for Iraqi units to signal their intention to stay out of the war.

''If they show the right signals and do not want to be part of a defense of Saddam's regime and weapons of mass destruction,'' the general said in an interview, the allied forces would do everything in their power not to target them from the air or on the ground.

The strategy is intended, commanders said, to speed the allied advance toward Baghdad by enabling American and British forces to bypass Iraqi units that have opted out of the war. The plan also reflects the calculation that American and British forces are more likely to be welcomed by Iraqis if they triumph with as little death and destruction as possible.

Allied commanders would need that public support if they are to administer and rebuild Iraq once Mr. Hussein is deposed. They are even considering using some existing Iraqi forces to remake the military once Mr. Hussein is gone.

''At the end of this we want to have an Iraq that is a viable country to build up,'' General McKiernan said. ''I personally can see a utility of the Iraqi military for the future of Iraq. No doubt about it.''

Air war commanders say they are planning a parallel strategy to limit the damage to Iraq's infrastructure. During the Persian Gulf war in 1991, the United States attacked power lines and electrical plants to cut off electricity to Iraqi air defense units and other military forces but turned out the lights for Iraqi civilians as well. This time, senior American officials plan to focus their attacks to prevent Saddam Hussein from commanding his forces, but to leave much of the electrical grid intact and many bridges standing -- bridges that may also be needed to speed the advance of invading forces on land.

''There are other ways of taking down the integrated air defenses rather than just pulling the plug on the electricity,'' Vice Adm. Timothy J. Keating, the top Navy commander, said in an interview at his Bahrain headquarters. ''You can disable the radars by striking them. You can take down the facility itself by putting a bomb in the roof. Or you can disable the means of communicating the information drawn by the radars and observers to higher headquarters.''

Maj. Gen. Dan Leaf, the senior Air Force officer in General McKiernan's headquarters, agreed. There are other ways to attack the Iraqi's command and control, he said, like attacking key nodes for transmitting communications or electricity to military sites ''without really turning off the juice.''

The American military approach, by all accounts, is not easy to execute, and some critics have questioned whether a blunt instrument like the military can -- or should -- be used in such a discriminating way.

Referring to a land war, Maj. Gen. Robert Scales, retired, the former commandant of the Army War College, said unnecessary attacks on the Iraqi ground forces could be avoided, but not easily. Good intelligence would be needed about the foe's morale, the quality of its leadership and a sense of the unit's importance for the enemy's defensive scheme.

''We will know from intelligence that some of Iraq's regular army units have been abandoned by both sides,'' General Scales said. ''The more difficult decision is how much of the Republican Guard and which ones to go after.''

Air and ground commanders have been studying which units are most likely to fight. Some units may be attacked because they are in the direct path of any allied invasion force driving into Iraq.

''There are some units that are more likely to fight than others,'' General Leaf said. ''The Republican Guards are more likely to fight than the regular army. There are some units that are positioned closer to friendly forces and are more likely to still be coherent, cohesive units before they have an opportunity to completely capitulate.''

''How do you balance the risk between the fact that the U.S. and coalition land forces are going to wind up in contact with these units and would like them just to surrender?'' he asked. ''We are going to have to make some difficult choices. And sometimes we are going to simply have to destroy equipment and destroy Iraqi soldiers.''

American aircraft have been dropping leaflets urging the Iraqi military not to resist. But the allied forces have yet to spell out the precise procedures the Iraqis should adopt if they wish to avoid a confrontation with the American and British forces. One concern, a British officer said, is that Iraqi forces loyal to Mr. Hussein could turn the strategy around on the United States and feign surrender only to attack allied forces.

While the commanders did not outline the measures, the sort of procedures they seem to have in mind include such steps as calling on Iraqi forces to park their vehicles and move away from their armor and heavy weapons. Iraqi forces might be asked to remove the batteries from their vehicles or turn around the turrets of their tanks so they do not face allied troops.

Lt. Gen. James T. Conway, the commander of the United States Marine force that would probably be prominent in any attack on Iraq, said any steps taken by the Iraqis needed to ''identifiable from the air,'' that is, seen by allied warplanes.

General Conway said that FA-18's, Harrier jets and Cobra helicopters from the Marines' air wing would identify Iraqi forces that were three to four days away from being confronted by Marines' ground forces. If the Marines detect indications that the Iraqis do not want to fight, they will try to communicate with the Iraqi forces and work out an arrangement to sideline them for the war.

''We would like to have them capitulate and take care of their own troops in something other than a prisoner of war camp,'' General Conway said. ''That makes it easier on them and makes it easier on us. We can say: 'Stay over there. We won't bother you. We won't attack you. But you have to understand that you are out of this and you are part of the new Iraq.' ''
