

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SOUTH ASIA; Anti-American Feeling Rises in Pakistan as U.S. Confronts Iraq
By David Rohde
Dec. 22, 2002

With the possibility of an American attack on Iraq looming, people like Tanweer Ahmed, an amiable man in a cardigan sweater, has Western diplomats and Pakistani moderates worried.

Mr. Ahmed, a middle-class 37-year-old Pakistani shopkeeper, says Presidents Bush and Saddam Hussein are ''equally aggressive.'' He cannot understand why the United States feels threatened by a small country like Iraq. He says it ''goes without saying'' that the United States is biased toward ''the Jews'' and discriminates against Muslims.

''There are so many doubts and suspicions among the people,'' he said, referring to Pakistanis' views of the United States these days. ''The gulf of hatred between the Pakistani and American people is widening.''

More than a year after President Pervez Musharraf cast his country's lot with the United States in the campaign against terrorism and Osama bin Laden's network, Al Qaeda, suspicion of and disenchantment with the United States is spreading through all parts of Pakistani society, Pakistani and Western observers say. There is also fear that Pakistan could be Washington's next target after Iraq.

''Over the last eight or nine months it's gotten a lot worse and that's what Osama and the people on his side want to foster,'' one Western diplomat said. ''This is a real danger. This can get out of hand on a lot of levels.''

An American war against Iraq is likely to harden opinion even more, according to a range of observers from Pakistani officials and academics to Western diplomats.

It could set off large protests, they say, and present a new set of challenges to President Musharraf and his military, custodians of the Islamic world's only known nuclear arsenal. There are already signs that the changing mood here has reduced Pakistani enthusiasm for pursuing Qaeda members believed to be hiding in Pakistan.

In a recent worldwide opinion poll by the Pew Research Center, 69 percent of Pakistanis held an unfavorable view of the United States and only 10 percent expressed a favorable one. Of the 44 countries surveyed, Pakistan tied with Egypt for the most negative perception of the United States.

A recent State Department poll showed rising support for Iraq, not the United States. Fifty-two percent of Pakistanis polled said they had a ''good'' opinion of Mr. Hussein, an increase of 9 percentage points increase from six months ago. And 67 percent of Pakistanis polled said they would oppose an American military attack on Iraq, even if it blocked United Nations weapons inspections.

A conversation with Mr. Ahmed, who has a dozen relatives in the United States and watches CNN and HBO on cable television here, suggests why. Mr. Ahmed said that a year ago he condemned the Sept. 11 attacks in New York and Washington. Now he voices some views that would please an Islamic hard-liner.

''Because of the mistakes of some people, Muslims all over the world are being targeted,'' he said.

The change appears to be driven by anger over American policy in places like Iraq and Israel, the observers said. New American immigration policies, anti-Muslim statements by conservative American religious leaders, and misleading accounts in some Pakistani newspapers have also contributed.

The deepest source of resentment, Pakistanis say, is that they are not being rewarded for their cooperation in the war on terrorism and, more important, are not trusted because their country is Muslim.

Instead, Pakistanis say, they are objects of American suspicion in a world they increasingly see divided between ''us'' and ''them'' -- us meaning Muslims and them being Christians and Jews.

New security screenings for males from Pakistan and 19 other Muslim nations have made it far more difficult to get American visas. Businessmen and college students bitterly complain of ethnic profiling.

At the same time, planeloads of Pakistanis deported from the United States under a post-Sept. 11 immigration crackdown are arriving. While American officials say that Muslims are not being singled out, that is not the perception here.

''Especially, they are cracking down on Muslims,'' said Wasim Abbas, a 33-year-old gas station owner recently deported from York, Pa. ''Basically, we are being punished while we are helping America fight against Al Qaeda.''

The recent disclosure by American intelligence officials that Pakistan shared nuclear technology with North Korea is viewed as a first step toward declaring Pakistan the next rogue state. Also, the Bush administration's diplomatic approach to North Korea and military approach to Iraq is seen as proof of an American double standard: one for Muslim countries, and one for others.

Rasul Bakhsh Rais, a political scientist at Lahore University of Management Sciences, said hard-liners were successfully blaming the United States for Pakistan's stagnant economy and other problems.

''Whenever anything bad happens to Muslims,'' he said, ''they see an Israeli, Indian or American hand.''

Misleading reports in Pakistan's Urdu-language press aid their cause. Recent stories have asserted that rebellious Afghans have killed 1,000 American soldiers in Afghanistan, that American Marines raped a secretary to Afghanistan's president, Hamid Karzai, and that Israeli soldiers will be guarding Mr. Karzai.

Not one of these reports is true. But diplomats and others say they are shaping Pakistani public opinion in dangerous ways. Pakistanis generally express a far more negative view that Afghans of the American presence in Afghanistan, which is often described here as an American ''occupation.''

There are other sources of resentment as well. Pakistanis said they felt betrayed that the United States, so eager to hold Iraq to account for defying United Nations resolutions, had never forced India to respect a resolution calling for a plebiscite in the disputed territory of Kashmir. Coverage on a new 24-hour news station and in the country's newspapers highlights Palestinian suffering and unconditional American support for Israel.

Meanwhile, the rewards that the United States has bestowed on Pakistan since last September go little remarked and little noticed.

The United States has rescheduled $3 billion in Pakistan's debt, launched a five-year $100 million aid program and provided $73 million in equipment and aid to secure Pakistan's border with Afghanistan.

The effect on Pakistani opinion has been negligible, as is that of a series of State Department advertisements saying that the United States is not biased against Muslims, according to observers here.

They said they feared that officials in Washington did not understand how America was currently perceived in Pakistan, or the potential complications for the United States-led campaign against terrorism.

''There is a gut level sense that the U.S. is anti-Muslim,'' the diplomat said. ''I think a lot of key decision-makers still don't necessarily realize that's how the Muslim world sees it.''
