

Reporter's Notebook; Texas in His Heart, Iraq on His Mind
By David E. Sanger
Jan. 4, 2003

When President Bush emerged in a giant gymnasium here today to rousing cheers of ''hoo-ah'' -- the all-purpose Army cry of approval -- he did not have the relaxed air of a man who has been on vacation for 13 days now.

There was little joviality in his voice, none of the easy quips he usually tosses out when in the warm embrace of a military that clearly welcomes him.

It has been that way since he arrived at his Texas ranch after a few days at Camp David, Md.: a president intent on clearing brush and taking runs along the six miles of trails that now snake through his 1,600-acre spread, but simultaneously preoccupied trying to divine the intentions of Saddam Hussein and Kim Jong Il.

While reports from inside the ranch are sketchy -- visitors have been few and tight-lipped -- the process of planning a war in the Persian Gulf and avoiding one on the Korean Peninsula has dominated what was supposed to be a long winter's break.


''Relaxing?'' one visitor to the ranch said. ''I wouldn't say so. He's a little quieter than usual.''

Someone else who has been at the ranch said that demeanor was probably due to a severe head cold.

Given such conflicting accounts, discerning presidential moods is always tricky business. It is particularly hard with Mr. Bush, who manages a pretty good game face no matter how he is feeling. Taking reporters on a four-mile power walk on Thursday morning, he tossed a few zingers at his fellow hikers as they panted to keep up. (Pointing out turkey vultures circling overhead, he joked, ''They're hoping one of us drops.'')

He also signed autographs for children on Tuesday when he stopped by the Coffee Station, the sole place to eat in Crawford, near the ranch.

But he made only the most modest stab at small talk with the locals there. His mind seemed elsewhere. He was in and out, burger consumed, in under 30 minutes.

And then today, after swooping in at this Army base that is home to 42,000 troops, there were no jokes about interservice rivalry, or football, or privations of Army life. He sounded a bit weary, particularly when the subject turned to Mr. Hussein. He was careful to repeat anew that he had made no decision to go to war. But he certainly sounded like a man who thought it now inevitable.

Mr. Hussein, he said, ''did not even attempt to submit a credible declaration'' of his weapons to the United Nations. ''We can now be certain that he holds the United Nations and the U.N. Security Council and its resolutions in contempt,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He really doesn't care about the opinion of mankind.''

It is not too late, Mr. Bush said, adding that ''Saddam Hussein knows precisely what he can and must do to avoid conflict; we have made that clear.'' But he told the troops to be prepared, noting that 1,600 were about to be deployed from here and suggesting that more sacrifices might be asked of them and their families.

Or, as one of his senior staff members said this week, ''Once we are back in Washington on Sunday afternoon, it's going to be quite a ride.''

Brush and the Big Screen

Lyndon B. Johnson had a ranch, not 150 miles to the south of Mr. Bush's. Ronald Reagan had a ranch, and used it for that peculiar presidential passion, clearing brush.

But Mr. Bush's place, Prairie Chapel Ranch, sports one amenity you could not find on the Johnson spread or at Santa Barbara: a secure videoconference center. When he greeted reporters the other morning, Mr. Bush said he had just used it for ''a visit with the vice president.'' He predicted that the technology would ''change the nature of how people live in many ways,'' and even suggested that it might be a way for White House reporters to keep their editors at a distance.

The bad news is that it makes it even harder for a president to leave his work at the office. Mr. Bush said his usual day at the ranch consisted of a morning C.I.A. briefing and perhaps a National Security Council meeting via the videoconferencing equipment (which is housed in a double-wide), followed by brush clearing, lunch, repair work, maybe a bit of fishing and then several hours of additional presidential work. Lately that has included work on the State of the Union address, set for late January. (Asked for hints about its contents, the leak-leery president shot back: ''I think all you've got to do is call the White House staffers. They'll tell you, evidently.'')

Mr. Bush did let one plan for the new year out of the bag: videoconference apparatus is soon to be installed on Air Force One as well.

His Plans, and Hers

Mr. Bush has always made it clear that when his presidency is over, he wants to settle at the ranch, where he can wander the cedars and the cottonwood trees without trying to explain why one confronts the Hussein family but tries diplomatic persuasion with the Kim family. But on his hike with reporters on Thursday, he suggested for the first time that his wife -- who was on her own hike, with their dog Spot -- might have a different plan.

''In my view, this will be the primary residence, and we'd have a town house somewhere else,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I think her view might be slightly different.''

''In which case,'' he added, ''her view will prevail.''

Climbing Balkan Hill

One standard feature of Mr. Bush's ranch tour is a ramble through the gorges and along the ridges that run through his land. This is the time of year to do it, because the water is high, the streams are running, and the waterfall that is his pride and joy actually has water.

He has begun to name some of the hills he climbs. ''The next one over is Balkan Hill,'' Mr. Bush said. It was named, he said, ''for Condi Rice, who gave us the history of the Balkans in the middle of a four-mile walk.''

Ms. Rice is sometimes teased by her colleagues for talking in perfect sentences -- something her boss has rarely been accused of -- and she apparently managed to carry on the seminar despite the brisk pace.

''I was impressed that she didn't break sentence during the -- full up the hill,'' Mr. Bush said, breaking his sentence.
