

The World; Where They Hate Saddam, and Dread the U.S.
By David Rohde
March 9, 2003

MANSOUR ISMAEL calmly announced that 23 relatives, including his aunt and uncle, died in Saddam Hussein's 1988 poison gas attack on the city of Halabja in northern Iraq. Eight years old then, he survived with his parents by cowering in a basement for a week. But 5,000 other Kurdish Iraqis died.

In the same calm voice, the 23-year-old college senior announced that Mr. Hussein alone was not responsible for the attack. He said the gassing was secretly approved by the United States. ''I think that it was only an experiment,'' he said, meaning a scientific experiment. ''That's my point of view.''

Several of his friends from Halabja voiced similarly suspicious attitudes toward the United States. One predicted that Washington would stand back and secretly allow Mr. Hussein to gas the Kurds again to gain international support for an attack on Iraq. Another said he believed the Iraqi government's version of events in Halabja -- that three Central Intelligence Agency operatives carried it out and Iraq was not involved. A third said the United States wanted to invade Iraq to create a larger Israel.

The source of their information? Web sites run by Islamist organizations, satellite television stations and scores of pamphlets and books that spread false or exaggerated accounts of American faults and misdeeds.

As the United States puts its troops in place for a possible attack on Iraq, Americans might expect that Kurdish survivors of Mr. Hussein's gas attacks would be among the staunchest supporters of an invasion. When asked, Mr. Ismael and his friends from Halabja assailed the Iraqi dictator and his brutality toward Kurds, and Mr. Ismael said Iraqis were likely to welcome invaders who ousted Mr. Hussein.

But they also exhibited a warped perception of the United States suggesting that once Mr. Hussein falls, Americans will have to face continuing mistrust of their intentions across the Arab and Muslim worlds.

The threat stems in part from the radical Islamist, anti-imperialist and nationalist views on new satellite television channels and scores of Islamist Web sites in the Arab and Islamic world. From these have emerged an ideology of sorts that presents the United States as evil incarnate.

Because this evolving creed draws from different critiques of the United States, it can mean different things to different people.

To those leery of globalization, greedy American corporations are out to rule the world. To nationalists, Washington will bomb into submission any government it does not like. To Islamists, the United States is waging war on Islam, not terrorism. And rather than removing war criminals from power, the United States itself is a war criminal in this world-view. The list of American victims stretches back to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Vietnam and Cambodia. It includes Bosnians, Chechens, Kashmiris and Palestinians, millions of Iraqi babies said to have died under United Nations sanctions and thousands of civilians said to have been killed by American bombs in Afghanistan.

The technique is classic propaganda, of the kind disseminated through the third world by the Communists during the cold war: seizing on what Americans see as a fault or tragic mistake, like racial segregation in the 1950's or the killing of innocent civilians in Vietnam, and recasting it as a malicious defining characteristic of an evil society.

Once the portrayal of malice has been sketched on a thin gauze of fact, flat-out lies are woven in to fill out the picture. And once an image of American malfeasance takes hold, new allegations are readily accepted.

So if there is an American invasion of Iraq in which only a few civilians perish and Iraqis treat American troops as liberating heroes, the attack is still certain to be portrayed on these anti-American Web sites and broadcasts as an act of aggression, arrogance and occupation.

Even here, in a corner of northern Iraq where an American-enforced no-flight zone has brought Iraqi Kurds a decade of self-rule, the same negative view of America that is expressed by young, educated Pakistanis, Saudis and Jordanians can be found.

Seated in the ''Kurdistan-net'' Internet cafe with a dozen young men, Mr. Ismael happily gave a visitor a taste of his virtual world.

He first visited www.raddadi.com. (raddadi means react), a dazzling site with color photographs and flashy graphics, which offers access to Koranic teachings and scores of Jihadi Internet sites, like ownbinladen.com. That site, he said, had pictures of 24 American soldiers killed two weeks ago by Taliban fighters in Afghanistan. American military officials say no soldiers have died in Afghanistan since one was killed in December, but Mr. Ismael said he believed the Americans died. ''They were in boxes,'' he said.

His views on Afghanistan suggest that even if cheering crowds turn out in Baghdad to greet Americans, as he expected would happen, the spectacle may not win over skeptics in other parts of the Islamic world. Mr. Ismael said that he had seen the cheering crowds in Kabul on television, but that the American-led campaign there was ''of course bad.''

Why? He estimated that 20 people die every week in Afghanistan in fierce fighting between tribes and between American and Taliban fighters. In truth, the fighting is far less intense than that. He also believes Osama bin Laden may be a C.I.A. agent and that the majority of members of the United States Congress are Jews. The source? A Web site and a pamphlet he received from a friend titled, ''The Jews and Influencing the International Mass Media.''

WHEN it comes to events he knows first-hand, Mr. Ismael is passionate. He argued fiercely with young men from Pakistan and Jordan in an Internet chat room that they were wrong to think of Mr. Hussein as a ''holy fighter.''

But that feeling does not allay his suspicions about American motives in Iraq. He pointed out that the United States continued to aid Mr. Hussein after the Halabja attack, which took place during the closing months of the Iran-Iraq war. And, like other Kurds, he bitterly complained that the United States abandoned them after encouraging uprisings in 1975 and 1991.

In a raddadi.com online poll that asked why the United States would attack Iraq, he chose three reasons: ''to remove weapons of mass destruction,'' ''to control Iraqi oil'' and ''to protect Israel.'' The only suggested reason he did not choose was ''to control the Middle East.'' Of the Web site's users, only 2 percent chose ''remove weapons of mass destruction'' alone, while 60 percent chose ''all of the above.''
