
Pentagon's Worry: Iraqi Chemical Arms
By James Dao
May 19, 2002

As the Pentagon prepares for a possible invasion of Iraq, military planners say the most complicated problem they face is the chance that President Saddam Hussein might use chemical or biological weapons against American forces and their allies.

That prospect has colored planning for almost every aspect of a possible invasion, from training and supplies to the location of an assault and the best time of year to begin, military officials said.

That Mr. Hussein might fire missiles tipped with chemical or biological warheads at Israel and other allies has also prompted discussion of a host of pre-emptive options for destroying his stockpiles or limiting his ability to use them.

None of those theoretical problems are considered large enough to deter an attack, senior military officials said. But they are more complex than the threats posed by Mr. Hussein's conventional weapons, because of the destructive nature of chemical and biological weapons and the widespread panic they can induce, the officials said.

The threat of biological or chemical attacks ''plays a huge role'' in preliminary planning about Iraq, said a senior military officer involved in the process, which is under way even though President Bush has not decided that any military action should be taken. ''Without question, it's the toughest nut to crack,'' the officer said.

Though Iraq possessed chemical and probably biological weapons during the Persian Gulf war of 1991, it did not use them, possibly because of American threats of retaliation.

But now that President Bush has placed himself behind an effort to change governments in Baghdad, military experts and Pentagon officials say they must assume that Mr. Hussein would use every weapon in his arsenal.

''This time, once the tanks start rolling, Saddam knows they won't stop until they reach Baghdad,'' said Kenneth M. Pollack, the director for national security studies at the Council on Foreign Relations and the former director for Persian Gulf affairs in President Bill Clinton's National Security Council. ''He has no incentive for restraint.''

Unlike Iraq's tanks, artillery and aircraft, which Pentagon planners do not find particularly intimidating, chemical and biological weapons are less well understood and induce more fear.

Those weapons are thought to include sarin and VX gas -- which attack the central nervous system, causing paralysis, convulsions and death -- as well as anthrax and botulism, said Charles A. Duelfer, the former deputy chairman of the United Nations commission that monitored Iraq's chemical and biological weapons programs until 2000.

To deliver those agents, Iraq has between one dozen and three dozen advanced Scud missiles that can travel up to 375 miles, Iraq analysts said. It is also thought to have drones, artillery shells and bombs capable of dispersing chemical and biological agents. ''Whatever he's got now, it's less than what he had in 1991,'' Mr. Duelfer said. ''But in 1991 we weren't going to Baghdad. It's different now.''

American forces have not been attacked with chemical weapons since World War I, the Pentagon says. Though troops are equipped with chemical suits, trained in the basics of chemical defense and inoculated against certain biotoxins, not even the most seasoned officers have any battlefield experience with chemical or biological weapons.

''Just the threat of its use can psychologically help an enemy,'' said Lt. Col. John Kulifay, chief of doctrine at the Army's chemical school at Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri. ''It causes confusion and takes away your focus.''

At the chemical school, trainers try to give soldiers a taste of that fear and confusion. Inside a semicircular building nestled in the woods, soldiers wearing masks and full-body chemical suits are put into airtight chambers tainted with enough poisonous nerve gas to kill scores of them. Before entering, trainees have a tendency to strap their masks on so tightly that their heads throb. Some break down in tears.

''They've seen pictures of what Saddam Hussein did to his own people with chemical weapons,'' said Staff Sgt. Brad Koland, an instructor.

The chemical suits, though lighter than those used a decade ago, are still very hot and cumbersome, reducing dexterity and lowering a soldier's ability to spot a target by as much as 20 percent, Pentagon studies have shown.

So the threat of chemical weapons, much less their use, can significantly slow the tempo at which units operate, forcing them to conduct repeated chemical and biological detection tests and to carry much more water than normal, both for drinking and decontaminating equipment.

The implications for desert warfare are obvious: Pentagon planners say they would prefer to avoid attacking in the summer because of the health problems and logistical difficulties created by wearing chemical suits in hot weather.

The school at Fort Leonard Wood trains about 5,000 soldiers a year, enough to fill a specialized brigade and to place chemical warfare specialists in most combat command units. Altogether, the Army has 17,587 soldiers with this training.

Military experts say the Pentagon is also considering a range of pre-emptive strikes to damage Iraq's biological and chemical stores, as well as the weapons to deliver them, before an invasion begins.

The problem, officials said, is finding the stockpiles. Mr. Hussein is thought to store those weapons in deeply buried bunkers that are difficult to demolish with nonnuclear weapons. He also moves his weapons about to avoid detection, and may even keep some near civilian areas to discourage attacks that might cause deadly plumes to waft over hospitals, schools and homes, military experts said.

''We look, for example, today at terrorist states, and they are literally putting their weapons of mass destruction capability right next to schools and hospitals and mosques, purposely,'' Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said in a Senate hearing this week.

To allay Israel's worries about being attacked, the Pentagon will probably send antimissile systems to Israel that are capable of shooting down Scuds. Another proposal calls for quickly seizing western Iraq at the outset of an invasion, to limit Mr. Hussein's ability to lob Scud missiles across Jordan into Israel, military experts said.

For all the concerns, there is a broad consensus that the United States is better prepared for chemical and biological attacks than a decade ago. Nevertheless, said Walter B. Slocombe, who was the under secretary of defense for policy in the Clinton administration, the use of chemical or biological weapons would be ''a horror.''

''It wouldn't stop the war,'' he said, ''and Saddam won't win the war because of them, and it shouldn't be a show-stopper. But you've got to be ready for casualties.''
