
A NATION CHALLENGED: DIPLOMACY; Cheney, in London, Receives Strong Support From Blair on Tough Stance Against Iraq
By Michael R. Gordon
March 12, 2002

On the first step of a tour to drum up support for tough action against Iraq, Vice President Dick Cheney received strong backing today from Prime Minister Tony Blair.

With Mr. Cheney by his side, Mr. Blair said at a news conference that Saddam Hussein's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction represented a grave threat. His view buttressed the Bush administration's contention that addressing the Iraqi danger may require military action, though Mr. Blair also stressed that a decision to use force had not been made.

He was categorical in his assessment of the threat: ''Let us be under no doubt whatever, Saddam Hussein has acquired weapons of mass destruction over a long period of time. He's the only leader in the world that's actually used chemical weapons against his own people. He is in breach of at least nine U.N. Security Council resolutions about weapons of mass destruction. He has not allowed weapons inspectors to do the job that the U.N. wanted them to do in order to make sure that he can't develop them.''

At the same time, Mr. Blair made clear that his government did not expect a rush to war. ''No decisions have been made on how we deal with this threat,'' he said, adding, ''What is important, obviously, is that we reflect and consider and deliberate.''

Western officials said after the meeting between Mr. Cheney and Mr. Blair that the British leadership agreed with the American assessment of the Iraqi threat and also that the removal of Mr. Hussein would be the surest way to eliminate it.

But, they added, Mr. Blair is concerned with ''managing'' the issue. There has been dissension within his party at the prospect of a military offensive against Iraq.

And the European public is far less supportive of military action against Iraq than Americans are. In part, that reflects the fact of the Sept. 11 attacks. But it also reflects a European preference for diplomacy over confrontation, as well as European anxiety over the Bush administration's proclivity for unilateral action.

London is the only European stop on Mr. Cheney's 10-day trip, which is to take him to 12 nations. Britain is the closest American ally in Europe. British forces were the only foreign military to fight alongside the United States in the opening weeks of the war in Afghanistan, and Britain might be the Western nation to contribute forces for an Iraq campaign.

Mr. Blair and Mr. Cheney had a private meeting today, as well as a luncheon meeting with top aides. Iraq reportedly made up only a small portion of the luncheon discussion, which also touched on the violence in the Middle East, how to bring stability to Afghanistan and support the government of Hamid Karzai, and North Korea.

The encounter gave Mr. Cheney a chance to display his style of diplomacy. American officials have made it clear from the start that he is not bringing a military plan with him, that he will not announce a military decision already made and that the Bush administration has not yet settled on a plan.

At the same time, the officials say, Mr. Cheney is not approaching his mission the way Secretary of State Warren M. Christopher conducted his early soundings on Bosnia policy during the Clinton administration. Mr. Cheney's mission has more to do with how the United States and its allies can eliminate the threat posed by Mr. Hussein than whether such an effort should be undertaken.

If there is a difference in emphasis in the British and American positions it may be on the issue of inspections. Some British officials said today that it would not be possible to build public support for a military campaign unless the West showed that it had first tried to resolve its concerns over Iraq's weapons of mass destruction by demanding the admission of United Nations inspectors. For them, inspection efforts would need to be rebuffed or frustrated in an obvious way so that war could be presented as a last resort.

Conservative members of the Bush administration have tended to see inspection as a potential snare. Their fear is that Mr. Hussein will use his discussions with the United Nations for prolonged negotiations that could tie Washington's hands when it came to military action.

Mr. Cheney seemed to be in that camp today. He said that only unrestricted inspections would be acceptable if it was necessary to deal with the issue of inspections at all.

''So if the issue of inspectors is to be addressed, we feel very strongly as a government that it needs to be the kind of inspection regime that has no limitations on it, that is a 'go anywhere, any time' kind of inspection regime, so that, in fact the outside world can have confidence that he is not hiding material that he has promised to give up,'' Mr. Cheney said of Mr. Hussein.

Inspections were not the only tricky issue. Mr. Cheney was also asked about the Pentagon's Nuclear Posture Review, which says that possible conflict with Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea should be taken into account in determining the size and composition of the American nuclear arsenal.

The disclosure of the Pentagon review in The Los Angeles Times has prompted some sensational reports in the British news media, which are already inclined to portray the Bush administration as a reckless power with a penchant for unilateral action. The front page of The Mirror showed a photograph of a angry President Bush yelling, ''Let's Nuke 'Em All!''

Asked about the Nuclear Posture Review, Mr. Cheney said it gave ''some idea of directions we'd like to move in the future.'' He also acknowledged that the Nuclear Posture Review cited Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya and North Korea as potential threats that needed to be taken into account because of their pursuit of weapons of mass destruction. But he noted that the review did not represent a contingency plan for the actual use of nuclear weapons.

Mr. Cheney said the United States ''does not target nuclear weapons on any nation'' on a ''day-to-day basis.'' But he did not say whether the United States had contingency plans to strike so-called rogue states with nuclear weapons in a crisis or in a war.

The rest of his trip will be more challenging. He leaves tomorrow for Jordan, which although broadly supportive of many elements of American foreign policy has a large Palestinian population and borders Iraq.
