

A NATION AT WAR: CASUALTIES; Wounded American Soldiers Recall Ambushes by Iraqi Troops in Civilian Garb
By Mark Landler
March 28, 2003

When combat finally came for three American servicemen, it erupted with chaotic swiftness. Worse, the enemy wore civilian clothing, making it all the more lethal for troops trained to strike a known target.

The three, a Marine corporal and two Army sergeants, recounted their experiences today at a military hospital here, where they are being treated for bullet and shrapnel wounds. They are among 24 American soldiers who were flown here from the battlefields of Iraq.

The three men were wounded during two ambushes a few miles apart last weekend. Staff Sgt. Jamie Villafane, whose left arm was wounded, said he captured four Iraqis. After surrendering, they took off their robes to reveal Iraqi Army uniforms.

In the second attack, a Marine unit patrolling a bridge in the southern town of Nasiriya came under fire from people in civilian clothes carrying AK-47 assault rifles. Lance Cpl. Joshua Menard, who was shot in the hand, and saw little of what followed.

''We were told when we were going through Nasiriya that we should see little or no resistance,'' Corporal Menard said. ''When we got in there, it was a whole different ballgame. They weren't rolling over like we thought they would.''

Sergeant Villafane and his gunnery sergeant, Charles Horgan, encountered similar defiance in their clash, which occurred on another bridge in a rural area a few miles south of Nasiriya.

Their unit, part of the First Battalion, 30th Infantry, had been asked to detour there on Saturday afternoon to check on a group of civilians described by passing Army units as unruly.

As their convoy of five vehicles crept across the bridge, Sergeant Villafane peered through his windshield at several men standing in a trench off to the side. He worried that some were hiding guns under their robes.

The last thing he recalls was a frantic cry from Sergeant Horgan, who spotted what he believed to be a rocket-propelled grenade bearing down on their Humvee.

The impact blew Sergeant Villafane out of the truck, leaving him dazed and bloodied on the ground. Sergeant Horgan was catapulted out of his gun turret onto the roof of the Humvee, his foot severely wounded.

The truck had been hit by a handheld missile fired by a man on the far side of the bridge.

Sergeant Villafane said he regained consciousness in time to see another missile streaking toward him. He threw himself out of its path, hearing it whistle, as it plowed into a second Humvee.

By now, the air was thick with smoke from the burning trucks and gunfire from across and beneath the bridge. As he collected himself, Sergeant Villafane's first thought was that his men were surrounded.

''We weren't nonchalant going in there,'' said Sergeant Villafane, 31, of Brentwood, N.Y., who spoke matter-of-factly with flashes of wit. ''But I did not expect it to escalate the way it did.''

While Sergeant Villafane scrambled for his machine gun, Sergeant Horgan hopped down from the Humvee, collapsing when he landed on the ground. His foot, torn open by shrapnel, could not support him.

''I tried to get up a couple of times, but I kept falling,'' Sergeant Horgan said. ''I looked down again at my foot, and it looked like it was gone, by the way the boot was hanging. It was blown open.''

As Sergeant Horgan crawled back toward the rear of the convoy, Sergeant Villafane fired at several people shooting from the far side of the bridge. He said he believed he hit one person.

He then spotted four men underneath the bridge who seemed intent on reaching two mud huts next to the pilings. From where he crouched, Sergeant Villafane said he could see that the huts held a cache of weapons.

He scrambled down the embankment, shouting after the men to give themselves up. The first man he encountered threw down his AK-47 and threw up his hands, speaking in Arabic.

''He looked absolutely terrified,'' Sergeant Villafane said.

The three other Iraqis emerged from behind a bridge piling and, seeing their comrade held at gunpoint, laid down their weapons and raised their hands. It was then that they revealed the Iraqi uniforms underneath their robes.

The first man gestured that Sergeant Villafane had hurt his hand and reached out to help. But he got a stiff rebuke from the sergeant, who was wrapping a bandage on his hand while keeping his gun trained on the prisoners. ''I was so aggravated by the whole situation,'' he said.

Sergeant Villafane moved his prisoners back up to the bridge, throwing a smoke grenade to obscure the view of the crowd of Iraqis still huddled at the far side. He directed his prisoners to the rear of the convoy and turned them over to a tank commander.

Sergeant Villafane then returned to get his men, throwing another smoke grenade and covering them with gunfire as they fell back in stages.

Along with another soldier, he helped Sergeant Horgan hobble back to the safety of a Bradley fighting vehicle. As the ramp drew shut, the men said they could still hear the roar of machine guns as the tank fired on the Iraqis.

Once inside, Sergeant Horgan noticed that Sergeant Villafane was bleeding from his arm. Sergeant Horgan cut open his sleeve to reveal a gaping wound on his forearm just below the elbow. Sergeant Villafane sustained nerve damage from shrapnel, as well as a shattered ring finger.

Sergeant Villafane then looked at Sergeant Horgan's wounded foot, revealing that a piece of his right heel had been blown off. Doctors here said Sergeant Horgan would not lose his foot, but would require physical therapy.

Sergeant Villafane still seethes when he thinks about fighting soldiers disguised as civilians. ''I thought it was disgusting,'' he said.

But he added that he understood why the Iraqis might have resorted to such methods. ''They have to do whatever they can do,'' he said.

Sergeant Villafane said he was anxious to return to his wife, Susan, and their three children in Fort Benning, Ga.

The soldiers said the fury of the gun battle, which lasted about 10 minutes, actually focused their minds, rather than confusing them.

''I was being oddly rational about what was happening,'' said Sergeant Horgan, 21, who is from Helena, Mont. ''I thought, 'O.K., my foot might be gone, I better crawl.' ''

The two soldiers even found mordant humor in their ordeal. ''We talked about how getting shot at wasn't really that bad,'' Sergeant Villafane said. ''It was just the getting shot part.''
