

THREATS AND RESPONSES: FOREIGN CORRESPONDENTS; Iraq Offers West's Reporters A Kinder, Gentler Face
By John F. Burns
Oct. 28, 2002


With Saddam Hussein's oldest son demanding that Iraq shift to a treatment of foreign reporters that reflects the ''fact-searching media of the 21st century,'' the Information Ministry today began what amounted to a charm offensive to convince reporters that Iraq is not hostile to Western news coverage.

A flurry of enhanced amiability at the official media center in Baghdad, headquarters for visiting reporters, appeared to be part of a wider effort by President Hussein to present a more moderate image to the world in the face of American war threats. All day, officials set out to counter reports that they were moving to expel members of CNN's Baghdad bureau, along with many other Western reporters, after the wide coverage given last week to scattered Baghdad street protests.

The shift in mood came as signs developed of uncertainty among high-level officials over how far Iraq should go in its efforts at describing itself as something other than a repressive state. Any doubts that Mr. Hussein himself was involved appeared to disappear when the older of his two powerful sons, Uday Saddam Hussein, a maverick figure who has often intervened to reverse government policies, used a newspaper he controls in Baghdad today to chastise the Information Ministry for overreacting in its handling of CNN.

''We find it useful to remind people that the news media of the 1970's,'' the younger Mr. Hussein's newspaper, Babil, said on its front page, referring to the years of President Hussein's rise to absolute power, ''are not at all the same as the fact-searching media of the 21st century.''

Within hours, the Information Ministry issued a statement in English saying it wanted to ''clarify that what has been claimed by foreign media that Iraq expelled journalists is baseless and untrue.'' Although CNN staff members were told that they would still have to leave Iraq as their visas expired, along with dozens of other Western news people, the ministry's top officials spent hours toning down their anger over the protests, assuring departing reporters that Iraq would remain open to Western news coverage as the crisis with the United States moves forward.

The shift in approach came after a tumultuous 10 days in which the government seemed to waver between a new policy aimed at a presenting Iraq in a gentler guise and fears that the letup may get out of control. A week ago, President Hussein all but emptied Iraq's prisons with a sudden amnesty, and Western reporters were swept into the country's most notorious prison, Abu Ghraib outside Baghdad, along with a mob that engaged in a frenzied effort to smash down cell walls and free all of the 20,000 prisoners.

In the days that followed, the Iraqi leader showed unusual restraint, at least by the harsh standards of the past, in dealing with family members who had protested in Baghdad's streets for information about long-lost kin who vanished into Mr. Hussein's gulag of prisons and detention centers. Nobody was shot down, as has happened on occasions in the past, and nobody was immediately arrested, at least not within sight of Western reporters. Instead, officials argued with the demonstrators to disperse, saying there was nobody left in the prisons to release.

But even as the protests subsided, matters deteriorated. Grim-faced Information Ministry officials were angered by widespread coverage of the protests, one of which was carried out outside the media center.

They focused their recriminations on CNN's Baghdad bureau, situated in the center, which used its satellite dish to broadcast live coverage of the demonstration. In one sequence, rifle shots could be heard being fired into the air in support of orders for the protesters to disperse.

Any hint of protest against Mr. Hussein's government is a matter of alarm to Iraqi officials, because it conflicts with the official line that all Iraqis love their government. But coming as they did immediately after the prison amnesty and a presidential referendum on Oct. 15 that Mr. Hussein won with a claimed 100 percent of the vote, the protests threatened to undermine Iraq's bid to counter American pressures by presenting him in a new guise -- that of a magnanimous, forgiving father figure with the unquestioning support of his people.

By Friday, CNN had been told to withdraw all of its non-Arab staff members from Iraq when their short-term visas expired, including the visiting correspondents Nic Robertson and Rym Brahimi. Jane Arraf, the network's Baghdad bureau chief since 1997, who is a Canadian citizen, had been told that she, too, had to leave. This led to Western news agency reports that the CNN representatives had been expelled. Eason Jordan, CNN's chief news executive, described the action in a statement in Atlanta as ''draconian'' and said it would ''sharply curtail the world's knowledge about what is happening in Iraq.''

By tonight, CNN staff members were confident that the worst of the pressures had eased. Ms. Brahimi -- the 34-year-old daughter of Lakhdar Brahimi, a former Algerian foreign minister who is the United Nations special representative for Afghanistan -- will remain in Baghdad until her visa expires in two weeks, assuring the network of continued news coverage by a staff correspondent. Ms. Arraf said she had been told informally that she would be granted a new visa in Amman, the Jordanian capital, within 48 hours of her arrival there early this week.

Other reporters who were given visas to cover Mr. Hussein's referendum were told that they must leave as their visas expired, and began packing in their Baghdad hotels for journeys to Jordan. A reporter and a photographer for The New York Times, whose visas expired on Saturday, were denied visa extensions but told that they could remain until the next flight to Jordan on Tuesday. Uday al-Taee, director general of the Information Ministry, said new visa applications would be reviewed after the reporters departed.

Left unresolved were the ministry's warnings to CNN that any news organizations sending reporters to the three provinces of northern Iraq that are run as a separate mini-state by two Kurdish nationalist parties would result in the termination of those organizations' coverage from Baghdad. CNN now has a news team in the north, as do some other American news organizations. Baghdad's sensitivities have been heightened by reports that the Pentagon and the C.I.A. have sent teams there to prepare for possible use of the area for American military operations aimed at toppling Mr. Hussein.
