

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTELLIGENCE; U.S. Aides Split On Assessment Of Iraq's Plans
By Michael R. Gordon
Oct. 10, 2002

A letter to Congress from the director of central intelligence has brought into public view divisions within the administration over what intelligence shows about Iraq's intentions and its willingness to ally itself with Al Qaeda.

The letter and other reports from the C.I.A. paint a worrisome picture of Iraq's pursuit of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. But they do not support the White House's view that Iraq presents an immediate threat to the American homeland and may use Al Qaeda to carry out attacks at any moment.

Current and former administration officials say divisions between the C.I.A. and the White House and civilian Defense Department officials over intelligence on Iraq have been simmering for months.

But with the Oct. 7 letter, sent in the name of the director, George J. Tenet, the divisions came into the open.

As some Democratic lawmakers sought to use the letter to challenge the administration's case for attacking Iraq, the C.I.A. told the Senate Intelligence Committee today that it would not declassify additional material the panel wanted.

At the heart of the debate, officials said, is the question of whether Iraq would give weapons of mass destruction to terrorists to attack the United States.

Seeking to mobilize public support for a possible military campaign to overthrow President Saddam Hussein, President Bush, in a speech on Monday in Cincinnati, cast Iraq as an imminent threat and asserted that Baghdad might seek to strike targets on American soil with the help of terrorist groups or by moving drones filled with germs or chemical weapons close to the United States.

''Iraq could decide on any given day to provide a biological or chemical weapon to a terrorist group or individual terrorists,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Alliance with terrorists could allow the Iraq regime to attack America without leaving any fingerprints.''

In the Tenet letter and in testimony to Congress, the C.I.A. took a less alarming view. The agency argued that Iraq's efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and build its arsenal of biological and chemical weapons were a serious concern that could encourage Iraqi ''blackmail.''

But it also argued that Iraq would refrain from ''the extreme step'' of assisting terrorists in attacking the United States with weapons of mass destruction if Washington did not invade. Iraq, the agency suggested, has little reason to provoke Washington to march on Baghdad.

The agency also noted that using chemical or biological arms would undercut Iraq's claims that it no longer has such weapons.

''Baghdad for now appears to be drawing a line short of conducting terrorist attacks with conventional or C.B.W. against the United States,'' Mr. Tenet's letter read, referring to chemical and biological weapons. ''Should Saddam conclude that a U.S.-led attack could no longer be deterred, he probably would become much less constrained in adopting terrorist actions.''

Intelligence specialists said the letter opened a window into a dispute that had been kept under wraps.

''The agency line is that it is basically unlikely that Iraq would give weapons of mass destruction to terrorists under most circumstances,'' said Kenneth M. Pollack, who worked as a military analyst at the C.I.A. before serving as the top aide for Persian Gulf affairs on President Bill Clinton's National Security Council. ''It is not Iraq's method of operation.

''The Bush administration is trying to make the case that Iraq might try to give weapons of mass destruction to Al Qaeda under current circumstances,'' he added. ''But what the agency is saying is that Saddam is likely to give such weapons to terrorists only under extreme circumstances, when he believes he is likely to be toppled.''

The case for taking military action against Iraq, proponents of such action say, should not depend on establishing Iraq's links to Al Qaeda. Iraqi's acquisition of nuclear weapons, a senior Bush administration official asserted, could alter the balance of power in the Persian Gulf and embolden Mr. Hussein to take aggressive action.

Such considerations, however, might seem remote to much of the American public. Ever since 9/11, hard-line administration officials have sought to establish that there is an Iraqi link to Al Qaeda.

The White House assertion of a terrorist link hits an emotional chord and plays on the American sense of vulnerability, said Daniel Benjamin, an expert on terrorism for the National Security Council during the Clinton administration, who has asserted that there is not a strong connection.

There have also been tensions between the Pentagon and the C.I.A. over the strength of intelligence indicating an Iraq-Qaeda connection.

Within the government, neither the C.I.A. nor the White House is eager to advertise their differences. The dispute, in fact, was forced into the open by Senator Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida and chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, who has argued that fighting terrorist groups should be a higher priority than invading Iraq.

Senator Graham asked the C.I.A. in July to update its classified National Intelligence Estimate on Iraq's weapons programs and make it available before lawmakers voted on whether to authorize the use of military force against Iraq. The agency gave the estimate to the committee on Oct. 1.

Senator Graham's next move was to seek to declassify the agency's assessment so it could be a part of the Congressional debate. After several requests, the agency declassified some information, a spokesman for the senator said.

Seeking to dispel reports of divisions within the administration, the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, insisted that Mr. Tenet's letter did not undercut the White House's position. Other administration officials asserted that Mr. Bush was right to force the issue at this time because Mr. Hussein's intentions were uncertain, and that even a small risk that Iraq's weapons might fall into the hands of terrorists was unacceptable.

''The only person who has sure knowledge of whether Saddam Hussein will use those weapons is Saddam Hussein,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''If Saddam Hussein holds a gun to someone's head, while he denies he even owns a gun, do you really want to take a chance that he'll never use it.''

The C.I.A.'s assessment and Mr. Bush's presentation also differed in the nuclear realm. In assessing Iraq's nuclear ambitions, the agency said it would take Iraq until the second half of the decade to produce fissile material for a nuclear weapon. Mr. Bush omitted this forecast on Monday.

But Mr. Bush did include the C.I.A.-related warning that the Iraqi government could develop a nuclear bomb within a year if it managed to smuggle fissile material into Iraq.
