

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS; Hussein, Cranking Up War of Words, Denounces U.S. on Documents
By John F. Burns
Dec. 11, 2002

With its 12,000-page arms declaration now under intensive American study, Iraq turned increasingly confrontational today with statements, one from President Saddam Hussein, suggesting that it planned to go toe-to-toe with the Bush administration in the war of words over weapons.

For a brief time last week, before the Sunday deadline for its formal arms declaration to be delivered to the United Nations, it seemed as though Mr. Hussein had chosen accommodation in the face of warnings from President Bush that the United States is ready, if necessary, to go to war to topple him.

At a meeting with political and military leaders on Thursday, Mr. Hussein urged patience in responding to the ''concessions'' that Iraq has been forced to make in declaring banned weapons programs and accepting the return of weapons inspectors. The time for ''anger and revolt,'' he said, would come later, ''when the situation calls for it.''

Today the weapons inspections continued, with a search of the uranium mine on the Syrian border that yielded the ''yellowcake'' uranium dioxide that Iraq tried to enrich in the 1980's and early 1990's for nuclear weapons. The Iraqi airwaves filled with the kind of angry and bellicose words that Mr. Hussein cautioned against last week.

The Foreign Ministry issued a statement condemning American maneuvering to gain quick access to the Iraqi declaration after it arrived in New York. At a meeting of what amounts to his war cabinet, the Iraqi leader abruptly became more like the Saddam Hussein who, in the middle of his conciliatory speech last week, expressed dislike for ''the colors falling between black and white,'' meaning the middle ground.

The Foreign Ministry statement focused on the Bush administration's pressuring of Colombia, holder of the rotating United Nations Security Council presidency, to hand over the Council's sole copy of the Iraqi declaration to American officials for photocopying and distribution to the four other nations that hold permanent Security Council seats.

The deal meant that Washington and the other major powers received copies almost immediately instead of waiting for the United Nations weapons-control agency to purge the Iraqi documents of technical information that could theoretically provide rogue states or terrorists with a blueprint for building biological, chemical or nuclear weapons.

Iraq, which itself has been accused of being just such a rogue state, has posed in recent days as a staunch upholder of nonproliferation agreements. Yet a top Iraqi general implied at a news conference on Sunday that Iraq had come close to perfecting an atom bomb immediately before its defeat in the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

In its statement today, Iraq said that the American action in immediately acquiring a copy of the declaration was ''an act of unprecedented extortion in the history of the United Nations,'' and that it opened the way for Washington's ''possibly forging what it wants to forge'' in the declaration before passing on copies. This, in turn, Iraq said, is intended to lay the groundwork for an American attempt to persuade other governments that Iraq has lied in saying that it has no banned weapons.

At the war cabinet meeting, shown on Iraqi television, Mr. Hussein was with about 15 of his top military leaders, including Defense Minister Lt. Gen. Sultan Hashim Ahmed; the army and air force commanders; the head of the nuclear commission; and the minister of military industrialization, the agency that controlled all of Iraq's secret weapons programs in the past. Mr. Hussein's two sons, Qusay and Uday, were also present.

The Iraqi News Agency gave only one brief excerpt from Mr. Hussein's remarks at the meeting, but that was enough to confirm that the meeting had been called to discuss preparations for a possible war with the United States. Mr. Hussein appeared set on girding his commanders for a severe challenge, especially for Iraqi forces -- poorly equipped, pitifully underpaid and widely demoralized -- that Western experts say have fallen on hard times since their defeat in the gulf war.

''Your heads will remain high with honor, God willing, and your enemy will be defeated,'' the Iraqi leader was quoted as having said.

An intriguing aspect of the meeting, visible from brief television clips, was the presence of Hussein's sons, who stood out among the career military men and defense officials in their civilian clothing. Mr. Hussein, too, wore a suit, something he has done more often in recent years since, according to a tale widely recounted in Baghdad, he was advised by a visiting diplomat that his fondness for military-style uniforms at times of crisis did not help ease concerns about Iraqi intentions.

The seating for the meeting, in a mirrored room that appeared to be in one of Mr. Hussein's many Baghdad palaces, showed Qusay, 36, at the right of his father, who sat at the head of a rectangular table. Uday, 38, sat several places away on the other side of the table, separated from him by several military men. While his younger brother wore a conservative business suit, Uday sported a dark-blue, collarless, Nehru-style jacket, a turtleneck and a stubbly beard.

The seating seemed to confirm what Western intelligence experts concluded some years ago: that Qusay is his father's heir apparent, while Uday, once seen as a likely successor, fell from favor after gaining a reputation as a volatile, erratic playboy.

But the sons' presence attested to their role in the hierarchy that sustains their father. Qusay Hussein commands the crack Republican Guard units of the army; Uday Hussein is the head of a widely feared paramilitary unit known as the Fedayeen Saddam, or Saddam's commandos, who act as shock troops.

At the United Nations headquarters on Baghdad's eastern outskirts, a spokesman said sites inspected today included a vaccine laboratory previously involved in the production of biological toxins for germ warfare, as well as a site only recently declared by Iraq, the Saddam Center for Biotechnology, where animal vaccine production could be diverted to toxin production. A cement plant, a chemical complex and several plants and storehouses in Baghdad were also searched.

Other inspections were conducted at Al Qa Qaa explosives plant south of Baghdad, which has been linked with nuclear efforts at the Tuwaitha research complex nearby. A team of nuclear inspectors traveled the farthest distance yet covered outside Baghdad, nearly 300 miles west, to the Iraq-Syria border, to check the Qaim phosphate complex, used in the 1980's to process ore from uranium mines in the area.
