

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DEBATING INSPECTIONS; Leaders of U.N. Weapons Inspection Teams Agree to Delay Their Return to Iraq
By Julia Preston
Oct. 4, 2002

The leaders of United Nations weapons inspections teams, responding to intense pressure from the United States and Britain, said today that they would delay their return to Iraq until the Security Council gives them new instructions to guide their work.

In a closed meeting with the weapons experts, the 15 nations who sit on the Council moved significantly toward agreement that they should toughen the rules governing the inspections, diplomats said. But even as President Bush warned again, in strong terms, that he would take military action to disarm Iraq if the United Nations did not, the Council came no closer to accord on a strong resolution including an authorization of military force.

''The choice is up to the United Nations to show its resolve,'' Mr. Bush said in remarks to Hispanic leaders in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building in Washington. ''The choice is up to Saddam Hussein to fulfill his word. And if neither of them acts, the United States, in deliberate fashion, will lead a coalition to take away the world's worst weapons from one of the world's worst leaders.''

The Bush administration, with its full-court press in Washington and world capitals, appeared to have made headway toward persuading the skeptical Council to adopt a new measure requiring Iraq to accept far more intrusive inspections that would include the palaces of the Iraqi president.

But France and Russia, two veto-bearing Council members, dug in their heels against giving the United States and its ally Britain blanket permission in an initial resolution to launch a strike to topple Mr. Hussein.

The Council today heard from Hans Blix, the head of the biological and chemical weapons inspection team based here, and Mohammed el-Baradei, the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, on their meetings in Vienna this week with Iraqi officials.

''It would be awkward if we were doing inspections and then a new mandate with changed directives were to arise,'' Mr. Blix said after the Council session. Asked if he is planning to delay the teams' departure beyond Oct. 19, the date Iraq has offered, he said, ''If the Council puts some new suggestions or directives to us, of course we are in their hands.''

Diplomats said Mr. Blix, a seasoned diplomat and veteran arms inspector, had made a practical decision to hold off his trip as he saw how intense the negotiations over the inspections have become.

''We have not purchased air tickets yet,'' Mr. Blix said. ''But we have plans, our readiness is there to go, yes.'' He said he hoped it would not be a ''long delay.''

Mr. Blix reported to the Council that there were ''loose ends'' left over from his talks with the Iraqi officials. The issue of immediate access for the inspectors to Mr. Hussein's compounds was not resolved, Mr. Blix and Mr. Baradei reported. They did not talk about procedures for interviewing Iraqi scientists or for removing items from Iraq for deeper study, he added.

Mr. Blix said he had not reached agreement with Iraq on how the inspectors would be protected inside the no-flight zones over large swaths of northern and southern Iraq, which are patrolled by United States and allied aircraft. The Iraqi officials said they could not guarantee the inspectors' safety in those areas, but Mr. Blix said today that he did not foresee a problem coordinating with the allied forces.

Mr. Blix told the Council he would welcome a new resolution to guide his work. Many of his ''loose ends'' are addressed in a draft resolution the United States and Britain have drawn up but not yet introduced in the Council.

In the meeting, France and Russia said they were ready to clarify the mandate for the inspectors, diplomats said. While the tide seemed to shift in favor of a French proposal for two resolutions -- one to set up the inspections and another to authorize military action if they fail -- American officials insisted forcefully on their single draft resolution. It calls for ''all necessary means'' against Iraq if Baghdad makes any move to block the arms inspectors.

The resolution has to include ''a mechanism to deal with noncompliance,'' an administration official said. ''It's not negotiable.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell kept up intensive telephone diplomacy today, speaking with the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, and his Russian counterpart, Igor S. Ivanov.

''The discussions are intricate, but I am optimistic that we will find a way forward in the Security Council,'' Secretary Powell told a meeting of Russian and American businessmen this morning.

On Friday, Secretary Powell and the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, are to meet in Washington with Mr. Blix to ''talk about his capabilities and ask if he needs anything more from us,'' a senior Bush administration official said.

The State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, repeatedly played down any suggestion that Washington would try to block the return to Iraq of the United Nations inspectors, for example by refusing to provide logistical and intelligence support.

A senior administration official summed up the situation in the Security Council this way: ''It's becoming increasingly clear that even on some days when the Iraqis say yes, people notice the next day when they say no. And people in the Council are realizing we're going to have to specify what the rules are.''

''Those who most want to see this settled peacefully are realizing that only with thorough and credible inspections is there any chance this will be resolved peacefully,'' the official said, ''and only when serious and credible consequences are threatened is there a chance of getting cooperation from Iraq.''

But French officials continued today to insist on their strategy of two resolutions. Answering questions in the French Senate, Mr. de Villepin reiterated the view that France was ''against unilateral preventive action'' and believed that ''using force can only be the last resort.''

Before addressing the Senate, Mr. de Villepin met a group of senators in a closed-door session. Former Prime Minister Édouard Balladur, who attended the closed session, later quoted Mr. de Villepin as saying that while ''certain modifications'' were possible, they could clearly not include ''automatic recourse to military steps, as far as the text of the first resolution is concerned.''

Mr. Chirac said Wednesday after meeting with Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany that both were ''totally hostile'' to the idea of a single resolution that would have automatic character.
