

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT; PROHIBITED MISSILE IS 'TIP OF ICEBERG' IN IRAQ, BUSH SAYS
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Feb. 23, 2003

President Bush said today that even if Iraq agreed to destroy all of its prohibited missiles, they are ''just the tip of the iceberg'' in its illegal arsenal and that Saddam Hussein had no intention of disarming.

Mr. Bush made his remarks during a news conference at the side of Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain, one of his strongest supporters on Iraq, who traveled to Mr. Bush's ranch here to consult on the wording of a new resolution the administration plans to present to the United Nations Security Council in the coming week. The resolution would declare Iraq in breach of its obligations to disarm and authorize the use of military force against Mr. Hussein.

The president characterized next week's talks in the United Nations as ''final deliberations,'' a signal that Mr. Hussein may have only weeks left before an American attack.

Mr. Bush was reacting to a demand on Friday by Hans Blix, a chief United Nations weapons inspector, that Iraq must start destroying within a week all of its Al Samoud 2 missiles and any illegally imported engines for use in rockets. If Iraq does not comply, American officials are certain to present the failure as powerful evidence that Mr. Hussein will never part with his weapons of mass destruction.

[In Toyko on Sunday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said American allies in Asia would lobby members of the Security Council to support a new resolution to disarm Iraq by force, if necessary. Page 13.]

If Mr. Hussein does begin to comply, the concern within the administration is that France, for one, will argue once again that the weapons inspections are working and that Mr. Hussein needs more time. Seeking to cut off that argument before it starts, Mr. Bush, showing considerable impatience, said today that getting rid of a few weapons was not enough.

''If Iraq decides to destroy the weapons that were long-range weapons, that's just the tip of the iceberg,'' Mr. Bush said, speaking in a helicopter hangar on the edge of his ranch.

Mr. Hussein, he said, will use words ''that sound encouraging. He's done so for 12 years. So the idea of destroying a rocket, or two rockets, or however many he's going to destroy, says to me he's got a lot more weapons to destroy.''

Mr. Bush, who spoke as the United States continued its push toward war on multiple diplomatic and military fronts, said he and Mr. Aznar had just completed a conference call at the ranch with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy to discuss the strategy in the battle for votes in the 15-member Security Council in favor of a new resolution.

So far the United States is sure of only three other votes besides its own: those of Britain, Spain and Bulgaria. A Council resolution needs nine votes to pass, with no vetoes from the five permanent members, which are the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China. At this point, France, Russia and China remain opposed to a new resolution authorizing force.

Today, Mr. Bush expressed some irritation at a reporter who asked how he planned to round up the necessary votes, and then said that there had been similar doubts before the last resolution demanding that Iraq disarm, which passed 15 to 0 last November. That resolution, 1441, opened the way for the current weapons inspections.

''This discussion sounds vaguely familiar,'' Mr. Bush said.

But in the months since, he said, Mr. Hussein ''hasn't disarmed, and so the clarity of vision that took place four months ago I'm confident will be in place after the Council takes a good look at the facts.'' Mr. Bush said the new resolution would declare in ''clear and simple terms'' that Iraq is not living up to its obligations.

''During these final deliberations, there is but one question for the Council to address: Is Saddam Hussein complying with Resolution 1441?'' the president said. ''That resolution did not ask for hints of progress or minor concessions. It demanded full and immediate disarmament. That, and that alone, is the issue before the Council.''

Mr. Bush met with Mr. Aznar and a handful of aides this morning to discuss what a senior administration official who took part in the talks called the ''tactics'' for the ''broadest possible vote'' in the Council.

The official did not say what those tactics were, but other administration officials have said that the current strategy is to try to persuade 9 of the 15 Security Council members to back the resolution, and then to confront France, Russia or China with the challenge of vetoing the will of the majority. Administration officials argue that even a resolution that passed with a weak majority would have authority.

Two other Council members, Germany and Syria, are opposed to a new resolution. Six -- Angola, Cameroon, Chile, Guinea, Mexico and Pakistan -- remain undecided. Italy, which is not a Security Council member, was part of the conference call today, an administration official said, to enlist the support of Mr. Berlusconi in lobbying other European nations on the Security Council.

Today, Mr. Bush said again that ''time is short'' and that the weeks ahead were the ''last chance'' for the Council to demonstrate its relevance.

Mr. Aznar, who arrived at the ranch on Friday night for what White House officials described as a social dinner with Mr. Bush, has been one of the president's most steadfast supporters on Iraq, even in the face of enormous opposition in Spain, where demonstrators have waved banners calling Mr. Bush a ''Toxic Texan.'' Mr. Aznar's visit here was part of a pattern in which Mr. Bush has pressed his case with leaders who agree with him on Iraq, like Mr. Berlusconi and Prime Minister John Howard of Australia, and then urged them to lobby other leaders.

Today, Mr. Aznar strongly supported Mr. Bush on Iraq and the campaign against terrorism, and like Mr. Bush said that ''we don't have much time.''

Administration officials also said today that they were still negotiating the details of a $15 billion aid package to Turkey in exchange for American access to Turkey as a military base of operations that would serve as a northern front against Iraq.

Later in the day Mr. Bush called President Vicente Fox of Mexico and President Ricardo Lagos of Chile to press them for their support.
