

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; U.S. Moves to Persuade Security Council to Confront Iraq on Arms Inspections
By Julia Preston and Todd S. Purdum
Sept. 14, 2002


The United States made rapid headway today toward persuading the Security Council to confront Iraq, as Russia hardened its position against Baghdad and the European Union supported a new resolution to force the return of weapons inspectors.

One day after President Bush told the General Assembly to enforce the United Nations resolutions on Iraq, Russia's foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, warned that Baghdad would face ''consequences'' for failing to cooperate with Security Council resolutions.

The precisely chosen language from Russia, one of the five permanent veto-bearing members of the Council, echoed that of Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, who in a whirlwind day of more than a dozen meetings with foreign leaders -- some individually, others in groups -- pressed the administration's case for a tough new resolution. Secretary Powell sought not only a condemnation of Iraq's past violations of United Nations measures but also the threat of stiff consequences for continued noncompliance.

''The one thing I'm reasonably sure of is whatever resolution we do come up with must have a deadline to it,'' he said as he left the United Nations today, after meetings with all 15 Security Council nations, most crucially a lunch meeting with the permanent members of the Council. ''It cannot be a resolution such as the resolutions in the past, where they are issued and there is no subsequent action to comply or be made to comply with the terms of the resolution.''

The Council nations today generally endorsed Mr. Bush's view that Iraq's failure to comply with United Nations resolutions, particularly those on disarmament, posed an international security threat, Secretary Powell and other government leaders said. But the Council remained very far from backing a military strike to remove the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein.

Iraq's envoy to the United Nations, Mohammed A. Aldouri, repeated today that Baghdad was not opposed ''in principle'' to the return of United Nations weapons inspectors, as long as the United Nations moved at the same time to lift severe economic sanctions it has imposed.

However, the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, has not responded to Mr. Bush's speech; Mr. Aldouri said he was still awaiting an official response from Baghdad.

One administration official said the State Department was hoping support could coalesce around a single resolution, to be offered by Britain, that could hold Iraq to account while preserving maximum flexibility for Washington and its allies.

''It doesn't have to be bellicose; it doesn't have to say military action,'' he said. ''It can say Iraq should finally stop obstructing, or abide by existing resolutions, and that if it doesn't it would be found to be in material breach of U.N. resolutions, and then a phrase like 'the individual member states are empowered to take further action as necessary to insure Iraq's compliance.' ''

That would allow Washington either to stage a military strike in concert with one or more of its allies, or to proceed with a unilateral operation if necessary. ''No one's going to be fooled by what we're trying to do,'' the official added, ''but perhaps this is a way.''

Secretary Powell told reporters at the end of his day here that discussions so far had centered on the broad outlines of a resolution or resolutions. A range of senior administration officials will begin traveling to foreign capitals soon to help sell the president's demand, he said.

Officials said Vice President Dick Cheney would probably come here for some lobbying next week. Work at the United Nations on specific language could begin at the end of the week or soon after, Secretary Powell said.

The secretary met with foreign ministers from the Gulf Cooperation Council, and separately with the foreign minister of the Persian Gulf state of Qatar, and said he found ''understanding and support for the president's speech.''

Russia announced its new stance early in the day. ''Of course, much also depends on Baghdad,'' Mr. Ivanov said, ''because resolutions issued by the U.N. Security Council are binding. In case Iraq refuses to cooperate with the U.N. Security Council, the Iraqi leadership will bear responsibility for possible consequences.'' He did not specify the consequences.

Up to now Russia had been stressing the need to offer Baghdad more hope that United Nations sanctions would be lifted, and had not spoken of the possibility of punishing Iraq for failing to comply.

Mr. Ivanov said that he met with Mr. Bush on Thursday, and that the president had promised to seek international cooperation.

''It was important to make sure the U.S. doesn't resort to any unilateral military action but shows a readiness to interact with the framework of the U.N. Security Council,'' he said.

But he also made it clear that Russia was still hoping to avoid an attack on Iraq, where it has extensive economic interests.

Mr. Bush's position, Mr. Ivanov said, provides ''an opportunity, to continue our efforts for a political settlement.''

Officials of the European Union said it would support a new resolution to force the immediate return of the weapons inspectors. But Per Stig Moeller, the foreign minister of Denmark, which currently holds the presidency of the organization, described a European proposal that involved a slower timetable than Washington seems to want.

Mr. Moeller said that Europe wanted the inspectors to be allowed to do their work according to a schedule laid out in earlier measures by the Security Council, a timetable of at least nine months.

Europe's view drew heavily on a proposal by President Jacques Chirac of France. In a sign of the diplomatic struggles that await the Bush administration, Mexico, an American ally and a nonpermanent Council member, endorsed France's approach today.

In his speech before the General Assembly, Foreign Minister Jorge Castañeda said that if Iraq failed again to comply with United Nations terms, Mexico, before endorsing a next step, would demand ''a clearer evaluation of Iraq's arms capacity'' and an agreement by the Council.

Foreign Secretary Jack Straw of Britain said today that the Iraqis would only agree to the return of weapons inspectors if it was ''written on their eyeballs'' that the alternative was the use of force.

''Everybody understands that the key target is to get the weapons inspectors in and get them operating without restriction, without conditions,'' he told reporters. ''Everyone understands that with this regime, we have to make clear to them that the alternative is the use of force -- that is the dismal truth.''
