

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; Iraq Discloses 4 Warheads In What Arms Inspector Calls 'Constructive' Talks
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 20, 2003

Iraq told the top two United Nations arms inspectors today that it had found four more empty chemical weapons warheads similar to the 12 discovered by a United Nations inspection team last week.

The disclosure came in a meeting here between Iraqi officials and the inspectors, Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, who returned to Baghdad today to urge the government of Saddam Hussein to intensify cooperation with inspection teams searching for weapons of mass destruction as a way to avoid war.

The inspectors, who are here for two days of talks, said Iraq's disclosure of the additional warheads was a sign that Iraq might be more forthcoming. ''I think we are making some progress,'' Dr. ElBaradei told reporters. ''It was a constructive meeting.''

Their visit, as American and British troops continue streaming into the region, comes amid much heightened tension: on Jan. 27, the inspectors, Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei, must present to the United Nations Security Council a crucial progress report on nearly two months of renewed inspections -- a report that may help determine whether the United States carries through with its threat to attack Iraq and oust Mr. Hussein.

The men arrived too after several days of inspections that ended in new skepticism about Iraq's full cooperation because of the discovery of the 12 empty chemical warheads at an ammunition storage depot and some 3,000 pages of documents at the home of an Iraqi nuclear scientist.

While the inspectors say they have turned up no ''smoking gun'' -- and are lobbying for many more months of inspections -- Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei were firm today that gaps remain in the information provided so far by Iraq.

Iraq, they said, must become more ''pro-active'' in declaring weapons, sites and documents if it is to convince the Bush administration that it has indeed disarmed or is serious about disarming. ''We are going to impress on our Iraqi counterparts the importance of providing as much information, as much documents, as much physical evidence as possible,'' Dr. ElBaradei said.

The men were met at midday today at Saddam International Airport by Amir al-Saadi, a top aide to Mr. Hussein, and held meetings at the Foreign Ministry with Iraqi nuclear officials and political leaders. They are expected to meet several more hours on Monday before leaving in the afternoon.

Their visit came amid a spike in defiant speeches by Mr. Hussein as well as efforts to avoid a war with potentially devastating effects in the region, notably from Muslim neighbors of Iraq. Saudi Arabia has begun a campaign to encourage Iraqi security forces to topple Mr. Hussein, Saudi officials in Riyadh said last week. Turkey has called for an urgent meeting of Iraq's neighbors, and its prime minister has urged Mr. Hussein to step down.

Since inspections began again in November, United Nations teams have carried out 400 visits to potential weapons sites, in recent days using information provided by American intelligence. How valuable that information has been is unclear, but on Thursday inspectors turned up 12 small warheads, all empty though designed to deliver chemical weapons short distances, that Iraq had not admitted to having.

Then inspectors removed 3,000 pages of documents, some of them concerning enrichment of uranium with lasers, from the home of a top Iraqi scientist, Faleh Hassan. Dr. Hassan maintained that the documents had already been declared to the United Nations and complained that inspectors acted ''mafia-like'' by hinting that he and his ill wife might chose to leave Iraq to assist the inspectors.

But Dr. ElBaradei said the United Nations did not know about the documents, now being examined and translated from Arabic, and that their discovery had raised a number of questions. ''We shouldn't have to find these on our own,'' he told reporters during a stop in Cyprus, en route to Iraq. ''Why should these documents be in a private home? Why are they not giving them to us?''

Officials in Washington called the discovery of the chemical warheads ''troubling and serious'' and part of an Iraqi pattern to avoid detection of its weapons. But both Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei played down both discoveries as relatively minor on their own, even as they said they pointed to the need for greater cooperation on the part of the Iraqis.

''These are not weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Blix said in the Cyprus. ''Documents are not W.M.D.,'' he added, using the common shorthand for weapons of mass destruction. ''Shells are not. But they are a sign that not everything has been declared and that is worrying.''

In general, the arms inspectors have praised Iraq's basic level of cooperation, which they say has been higher than the cat-and-mouse inspections that began after the Persian Gulf war. They ended, incomplete and in frustration, in 1998. So far, Iraqis have not impeded access to any sites the inspectors requested.

There have been some problems, however, which the men were reportedly going to discuss with Iraqis: on Saturday, a United Nations inspection team canceled an inspection in the northern no-flight zone patrolled by American and British warplanes after Iraqi helicopters insisted on accompanying United Nations helicopters to the area.

Today, inspectors, some wearing chemical weapons suits, toured at least five different sites.

In consultations with European leaders last week, Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei also made the case that the Jan. 27 deadline should be just the start, rather than the end, for inspections.

With antiwar sentiment apparently rising around the globe -- at least as seen in protests in the United States, Europe and elsewhere this weekend -- several top leaders agreed that inspections should be given more time. Those leaders included Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, Mr. Bush's closest ally in the drive to disarm Iraq and overthrow Mr. Hussein. His position could complicate any plans by Mr. Bush to attack Iraq without new United Nations authorization. --------------------

Air Strikes in Southern Iraq

WASHINGTON, Jan. 19 (Reuters) -- Warplanes taking part in a United States-British patrol over a no-flight zone in southern Iraq attacked eight sites today after Iraqi air defenses opened fire, the United States military said.

The targets were components of the command and control system for Iraq's air defense, the United States Central Command said in a statement from its headquarters in Tampa, Fla. The strikes were ''in response to Iraqi hostile acts against coalition aircraft,'' the statement said.
