

U.S. Action on Iraq Slowed by Rift Over Whom to Support
By Michael R. Gordon
May 10, 2002

Despite repeated vows by President Bush to force Saddam Hussein from power, Bush administration officials are still at odds over which Iraqi opposition groups the United States should support, American officials and Iraqi opposition leaders say.

Administration officials generally say that American military action would be needed to oust President Hussein and that Washington could not count on a coup in Iraq to do the job.

But the question of which Iraqi insurgents to back is a critical issue because the United States wants to avoid a power vacuum in Baghdad after any American-led military campaign to topple the Iraqi leader.

Iraqi insurgents would be expected to play an important role in any United States military strategy, since they could provide a base for American military operations, help identify targets, conduct sabotage against the Hussein government and perhaps carry out broader attacks.

But as planning for a possible military campaign proceeds, the State Department, Pentagon and C.I.A. remain divided over which insurgents to back.

The issue came to the fore recently when the State Department sought to arrange a conference of Iraqi opposition leaders that would have given only a limited role to the leadership of the Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella organization of opposition groups that is headed by Ahmed Chalabi, a former banker whose headquarters are in London.

State Department officials say the organization has failed to establish itself as a unifying force for the opposition and has been less than meticulous with its financial accounting. The group also has poor relations with the C.I.A.

But it is supported by Defense Department civilians, members of Vice President Dick Cheney's staff and Richard N. Perle, an influential adviser to the Pentagon, who insists that the organization's leadership is best equipped to coordinate Iraqi opposition groups.

After weeks of behind-the-scenes maneuvers, the State Department finally postponed its plans for the conference.

Financing for the Iraqi National Congress has also been a sore point. Late last week the State Department informed the organization that it was prepared to provide a short-term grant of about $1.1 million a month on the condition that a State Department official directly oversee its expenditures.

But the group informed the State Department this week that it was not prepared to accept the grant on those terms because the funds were insufficient and the procedure it proposed was too encumbering.

The group says it has run out of money and has stopped its four-hour daily satellite television broadcasts to Iraq, ended production of its newspaper and cut off salaries.

At the heart of the debate are the starkly different assessments within the Bush administration about Iraqi opposition groups.

The Iraqi National Congress has argued that an Afghan-style military campaign involving heavy American airstrikes, but only modest American ground forces, can work in Iraq and insists it is willing to carry out operations, which is music to the ears of civilians in the Defense Department.

Mr. Perle, who heads the advisory Defense Policy Board, says that the group should be supported because its platform calls for a democratic Iraq, an end to Iraqi efforts to develop weapons of mass destruction and a constructive policy on the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Mr. Perle contends that the failure to stir up opposition to Mr. Hussein in past years is not a result of the group's shortcomings but of halfhearted American support.

The C.I.A., however, has viewed the group as ineffectual while the State Department has sought to establish ties with a broader array of groups, an approach that it insists provides a better basis for a new government if Mr. Hussein is ousted.

The dispute over the conference began in February, when the State Department approached the Middle East Institute, a private group headed by Edward Walker, a former assistant secretary of state for Near East affairs. David Mack, the vice president of the institute and a former senior State Department official, was asked to develop a proposal for a conference that would grapple with the problems of governing Iraq if Mr. Hussein were removed from power.

The plan he presented called for a conference of Iraqi opposition leaders to be held this summer in Europe. Working groups of Iraqi opposition leaders and experts would also be established to focus on issues like restoring the oil industry, the military, public health and education.

The idea, Mr. Mack said, was not to set up a formal government in exile but to ''lay the building blocks for a post-Saddam Hussein Iraq.'' The State Department earmarked $5 million for the project.

As Mr. Mack set about organizing the conference, it was clear that the leadership of the Iraqi National Congress was not to play a dominant role. In preparation for the conference, a small group of Iraqi opposition leaders were invited to a planning session in Washington.

The nine who attended included representatives from the two main Kurdish factions as well as the Iranian National Accord, an opposition group that includes former generals and former officials of the ruling Baath Party. The groups are members of the Iraqi National Congress, but were invited individually.

The leadership of the Iraqi National Congress was limited to a single representative. Mr. Chalabi arrived for the session but left when the rule on a single representative was enforced. He arranged for another member to represent the group.

Soon, however, the Bush administration discovered that the plan for the conference had a glaring, political vulnerability. Mr. Walker, of the Middle East Institute, had criticized Mr. Bush's statements about an ''axis of evil'' that consists of Iraq, Iran and North Korea.

It did not help that the institute accepts contributions from wealthy Saudis and Qataris. Staunch conservatives on Capitol Hill moved to block financing.

Yielding to the complaints, the State Department informed the Middle East Institute recently that it was no longer going to hold the conference. But that has left the Bush administration without an agreed policy that Iraqi opposition groups can support. It has also put the American effort to plan Iraq's future on a slower track.

The State Department insists it has not abandoned the idea of a conference. The department plans to begin by organizing some working groups with the help of a variety of private organizations. The working groups could meet as soon as next month.

''We are going to start this slower and hopefully build to critical mass'' an administration official said.
