

A NATION AT WAR: WEAPONS; Allies Say They Took Iraqi Posts Early to Prevent Use of Chemical and Biological Arms
By David E. Sanger and Thom Shanker
March 23, 2003

In the opening hours of the war against Iraq, American and Australian special forces flew deep into the country and seized or blew up specific command posts far from Baghdad to prevent officers there from ordering the use of chemical and biological weapons, according to officials of the coalition forces.

The outposts were selected for urgent, risky attacks because intelligence agencies had reported that the field commanders had operational control of those weapons, and might have been given standing authority by Saddam Hussein to use them even if he were killed or could no longer communicate his orders.

Officials stressed that no chemical or biological weapons were stored at the command centers that have been attacked thus far in the campaign. The Iraqis have denied having such weapons.

Officials who described the covert operations said they could not reveal how the targets were chosen, where the outposts were or how many of them there were, as those details remained sensitive while the invasion of Iraq was still under way.

The use of Special Operations forces in the attacks, though, is a sure sign that coalition commanders viewed the targets as unusually significant command centers, not the ordinary kind of outpost that might be easily destroyed by bombing.

Sending highly trained, specialized troops secretly to do the job is a complex and dangerous mission, and the troops assigned to it are used only for extremely important jobs. An added advantage of striking in this way is that it makes it possible to take prisoners and seize evidence that could point the way to other command posts or to the weapons themselves.

In one mission, Australian commandos were discovered by the Iraqis and fought a skirmish that injured or killed more than 10 of the enemy, the officials said.

''We don't know where Saddam is or whether he's able to communicate,'' said one senior official with detailed knowledge of the covert operation. ''But we know we got to these command centers before anyone there had time to do anything.''

Australia's commander in the region, Brig. Gen. Maurie McNarn, mentioned the operation by Australian Special Air Service commandos to reporters in Qatar on Friday.

He said that his forces had moved ''deep inside Iraq'' for several days.

''Their primary role is strategic reconnaissance, although in some cases where there are command and control nodes which are used for communications for controlling W.M.D.,'' he said, using the abbreviation for weapons of mass destruction, ''We will in some cases have taken direct action against those.''

He said one of the squads had ''wounded a number'' of Iraqis, but other officials said they believed some of the Iraqi forces had been killed.

At the Pentagon today, one senior official said, ''Those places are going down all over'' Iraq.

Senior military officials said today that bombs and missiles fired by coalition aircraft had hit such targets as missile launchers and artillery batteries thought to be capable of firing chemical weapons, along with the communications equipment at those locations.

Attacks on suspected storage sites for chemical or biological weapons risked spreading the poisons, officials said, and had not yet been ordered in this campaign, senior military officials said today.

Specialized explosives, however, have been developed for that mission.

At the United States Central Command's forward headquarters in Qatar, senior military officials confirmed today the overall outlines of the commando missions.

They said the search for the weapons themselves was still under way.

''Coalition Special Operations forces entered Iraq at night, after destroying Iraqi military outposts,'' said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks.

''The Special Operation Forces then began looking for Saddam Hussein's and the regime's weapons of mass destruction and their ballistic missiles that threaten their neighbors.''

Senior Pentagon and military officials said they remained extremely concerned that Mr. Hussein's forces might still fire chemical or biological weapons at allied forces, and were circumspect about success thus far in seizing those arsenals.

''One would expect that weapons of mass destruction would perhaps be found in certain parts of the country, and that is work that lies in front of us rather than work we have already accomplished,'' Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of the war against Iraq, said today.

''The amount of time that it will take to identify those weapons and control them remains to be seen, very candidly.''

An Arab official familiar with the war operations said today that ''getting these command centers was one of the bigger events of the war,'' because it was from them, rather than from Baghdad, that the coalition expected instructions to emanate to start an unconventional counterattack.

Officials have been willing to talk about the operation in part to put the spotlight on non-American forces in the coalition.

Australia's special forces are considered among the world's most skilled, and American officials have cited their role in such a critical mission in the early hours of the war to demonstrate that the battle is not being waged solely by American and British forces.

American officials all but rule out the possibility that Iraq, as it has often declared, actually possesses no weapons of this kind. They have said many times that they are certain that the weapons exist and that they will find them once the coalition forces control Iraq.

Some of them expressed the lingering fear that the most potent weapons are being deliberately withheld until American forces get close to Baghdad.

''We went into this figuring that Saddam knows this is a fight for his own survival, and assuming that he would throw everything he has at us,'' said one senior official in Washington.

''He hasn't done it, and we can't tell if that is a matter of wisdom or necessity.''

The officials remained mystified today about whether Mr. Hussein is alive, and if so, whether he has found a way to communicate with his military. ''The working assumption is that he's alive, but probably injured, and a bit in shock,'' said one American official. ''But the evidence is scant.''

Senior American military officials denied reports that Mr. Hussein's top officer for chemical weapons, Ali Hassan al-Majid, had been killed. Nicknamed ''Chemical Ali,'' for his role commanding attacks in the 1980's against Kurds in northern Iraq, he was said by officials to be operating in southern Iraq.

Coalition military forces hit at least one location where he might have been, officials confirmed today. ''We didn't get him,'' one senior Pentagon official said today.
