

Carter Accepts Nobel and Gives Message on Iraq
By Frank Bruni
Dec. 11, 2002

With a broad smile and an air of satisfaction, former President Jimmy Carter accepted the Nobel Peace Prize today, then used the vaunted platform to try to steer events away from an armed conflict in Iraq.

Mr. Carter's speech, during a gilded ceremony here that represented a high point in his extraordinary life journey, included a warning to Baghdad that it meet the United Nations Security Council's demand for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

''The world insists that this be done,'' he said. [Excerpts, Page A14.]

But his speech also seemed to have a message, more implicit than explicit, for the Bush administration, which had talked in the past about waging war against Iraq without United Nations backing and had framed such an engagement as a safeguard against future threats to the United States.

''It is clear that global challenges must be met by an emphasis on peace, in harmony with others, with strong alliances and international consensus,'' Mr. Carter said. ''Imperfect as it may be, there is no doubt that this can best be done through the United Nations.

''For powerful countries to adopt a principle of preventive war,'' he later added, ''may well set an example that can have catastrophic consequences.''

Although the former president spoke broadly and did not link those comments to the possibility of a military strike against Iraq, the relevance was unmistakable. His remarks came at a time of keen international tensions over the situation, and were delivered from a world podium as tall, in symbolic terms, as any leader could hope to command.

Two months ago, when the prize committee announced Mr. Carter as the winner of this year's award, the citation praised him as an advocate for peace during a period ''marked by threats of the use of power.''

The committee chairman, Gunnar Berge, went further, telling reporters that the selection of Mr. Carter, who had been publicly critical of the Bush administration's aggressive posture toward Iraq, ''should be interpreted as a criticism of the line that the current administration has taken.''

But that was not the main reason the committee cited. It referred to Mr. Carter's role, as president, in helping to forge the Camp David accord between Israel and Egypt in 1978.

It also noted his ambitious humanitarian work since he left the White House in 1981 and founded the Carter Center, a private foundation in Atlanta dedicated to promoting peace. In poor and troubled nations around the globe, Mr. Carter, 78, has fought disease, built houses, monitored elections and prodded dictators to respect human rights.

To Mr. Carter and his closest aides, the award also seemed to represent cause for hope that his years in the White House, dragged down by the Iranian hostage crisis and runaway inflation, would be viewed more favorably over time. In the days leading up to the award ceremony, they occasionally revisited and sought to recast his administration's record.

''I think any objective analyst would recognize that we had one of the toughest and most potentially unpopular agendas in history,'' Mr. Carter said in a telephone interview late last week, shortly before he left Atlanta for Oslo.

He mentioned his battles for a Palestinian homeland, normalized relations with China and energy conservation, all of which became more widely accepted ideas during subsequent administrations.

The former president also said that while he may now be held in higher regard by many people than he was two decades ago, ''I haven't changed, as far as I can tell.''

In presenting the Nobel medal to Mr. Carter today, Mr. Berge said, ''Carter's principal concern was to do what he felt was right, even when it was not the smartest political step to take.''

Mr. Carter is only the third American president, after Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson, to receive the Nobel Peace Prize, which was first awarded in 1901.

The honor clearly elated him. He traveled to Norway with about 80 friends and relatives, and he beamed early this afternoon as trumpet blasts heralded his arrival in the grand auditorium of Oslo City Hall, which was bedecked with yellow and orange flowers.

After the American soprano Jessye Norman sang several songs in his honor, he silently blew her a kiss.

In his roughly 20-minute speech, he denounced what he called ''the growing chasm between the richest and poorest people on earth'' and beseeched rich nations ''to share with others an appreciable part of our excessive wealth.''

He implored Israel to heed United Nations Resolution 242, which he said called for Israel to withdraw from occupied territories.

''There is no other mandate whose implementation could more profoundly improve international relations,'' Mr. Carter said.

Aides said his speech was not intended as a direct commentary on the possibility of war with Iraq. They also said his repeated statements about international consensus and the importance of the United Nations could be seen as an endorsement of the Bush administration's current cooperation with the United Nations Security Council.

But those statements also seemed to reflect his previously stated misgivings about the Bush administration's sometimes unilateralist tendencies.
''Great American power and responsibility are not unprecedented, and have been used with restraint and widespread benefit in the past,'' Mr. Carter said.

''War may sometimes be a necessary evil,'' he later added. ''But no matter how necessary, it is always evil, never a good. We will not learn how to live together in peace by killing each other's children.''

In a subsequent interview with CNN from the stage of the auditorium, Mr. Carter said that if international inspectors deemed Iraq to be in violation of the Security Council mandate against weapons of mass destruction, a military strike would not, at that point, be unprovoked.

But, seemingly questioning the need for it, he also said he did not believe that Iraq currently represented a direct threat to the United States.

''We should concentrate first on the obvious threat around the world from Al Qaeda,'' he said.

Mr. Carter almost received the peace prize in 1978, along with Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt and Menachem Begin of Israel, in recognition for brokering the peace treaty between them. But he had not been nominated in time.

Asked during the CNN interview if that had bothered him, he said, ''It was hard for me to understand.''

Then, grinning about it now, he added, ''I have to admit: I really wanted to earn the Nobel Peace Prize.''
W