

A NATION CHALLENGED: DIPLOMACY; Bush Hails Musharraf, and Warns Iraq
By David E. Sanger
Feb. 14, 2002


President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, whom the United States treated as an outcast after he seized power in a coup two years ago, was welcomed to the White House by President Bush today as a ''leader of great courage and vision'' who would continue to receive economic and military aid for his help in the war against terrorism.

At a news conference with General Musharraf, Mr. Bush also implicitly acknowledged that he was reviewing options to topple Saddam Hussein of Iraq. A variety of actions are under consideration, he said. ''I will reserve whatever options I have. I'll keep them close to my vest.''

He added, ''One of the worst things that can happen in the world is terrorist organizations mating up with nations which have a bad history, and nations which develop weapons of mass destruction.''

''Saddam Hussein needs to understand I am serious about defending our country,'' he said.

The warmth of the welcome General Musharraf received at the White House indicated that he has been rehabilitated in Washington's eyes since the Sept. 11 attacks. Soon afterward, the Pakistani leader swung his support behind the United States and away from the Taliban rulers that Pakistan had supported in Afghanistan. Since then, the Pakistani leader has also pledged to crack down on terrorism practiced against India by groups with ties to Pakistan or with bases there, and has arrested hundreds of Islamic militants.

One sign of the administration's new solicitousness toward Pakistan is that Mr. Bush did not, according to his spokesman, Ari Fleischer, raise the subject of North Korea's missile exports to Pakistan, even though the United States has identified Islamabad as one of North Korea's biggest customers.

Asked if American aid would be contingent on Pakistan severing its ties to North Korea and its missile program, Mr. Fleischer said, ''Not that I've heard.''

Some Clinton-era sanctions on Pakistan for its dealings with North Korea remain in effect.

While General Musharraf, who was dressed in a civilian suit rather than the military uniform he often prefers at home, clearly reveled in his warm greeting here, he will not return home with many economic benefits for his impoverished country. Mr. Bush promised very little new money, aside from a $200 million credit to write off nearly $1 billion in Pakistani debt.

The general would most like to receive American arms shipments, or trade concessions to make it easier for Pakistan to export textiles here. Members of Congress from textile states have bitterly fought administration efforts to lift the barriers on such imports.

At the Pentagon, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, who met separately with General Musharraf, said only that the two had discussed ways of reviving cooperation that existed before the Clinton administration imposed sanctions after Pakistan and India tested nuclear weapons in 1998.

At the White House, General Musharraf also said he was ''reasonably sure'' that the kidnapped Wall Street Journal reporter, Daniel Pearl, was still alive. But he offered no evidence. A leading suspect in the case, apprehended a day ago by Pakistani authorities, has reportedly admitted his involvement in the kidnapping, but professed not to know where the reporter was being held.

General Musharraf suggested that the kidnapping was part of a predictable backlash to his crackdown on extremist Islamic groups in Pakistan. ''We are not deterred,'' he said, ''These kinds of things were expected.''

The mere presence of the Pakistani leader in Washington was sufficient to ruffle India, which continues to see the general as duplicitous, and failing to make a genuine effort to contain terrorism.

India today huffily dismissed a vague accusation Mr. Musharraf made Tuesday night in a speech here, when he contended his country's adversary had conducted -- or was about to conduct -- fresh nuclear tests.

Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee rejected the allegations as routine propaganda, the ''old tactics of Pakistan to mislead the world community.''

General Musharraf made the initial remark at an event arranged by the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars and the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

He broached the alarming issue by mentioning India's Jan. 25 test-firing of the Agni, an intermediate-range missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead.

''The missile test carried out by India and some information, some news even, of maybe a possibility of a nuclear test is most untimely and may I also say provocative,'' the general said elliptically.

After the speech, he was asked to clarify the statement.

''There are certain indications and I did share this information with the United States leadership,'' the general said, shedding little more light. ''I can't give conclusive evidence of it. But I thought if at all there was a possibility, it should be checked.''

Nirupama Rao, a spokeswoman for India's Foreign Ministry, said today that ''false allegations'' coming from General Musharraf's lips were ''timed-released capsules of diversionary propaganda.''

Last week, in an interview with The Washington Post, the general said ''it was very much a possibility'' that India orchestrated the kidnapping of Mr. Pearl.

To even the recriminatory score, Mr. Vajpayee said today that Ahmed Omar Sheikh, the chief suspect detained in the kidnapping and someone considered a terrorist by India, could not have lived clandestinely in Pakistan ''without the government's connivance.''

General Musharraf's accusation about an Indian nuclear test underscored the lingering worries about a confrontation between the two powers of the subcontinent, who have fought three wars since the territory of the old British Raj split into two countries, India and Pakistan, in 1947.

Kashmir is the major bone of contention. Pakistan believes all of the mostly Muslim territory in the Himalayas should have become part of Pakistan in 1947.

Most recently, both India and Pakistan have massed troops on their mutual border. The buildup followed a Dec. 13 attack on the Indian Parliament, which the Indians quickly attributed to two militant groups operating in Pakistan and pushing to get Kashmir back from India.

Many analysts have said the greatest danger of a nuclear exchange stems from the inability of the two suspicious foes to monitor accurately what the other is doing. Bush administration officials have begun to talk -- although not necessarily with the two countries -- about some kind of an arms control agreement or understanding of each other's nuclear doctrine.

''The chances of either side making a mistake are greater than ever,'' one senior administration official said recently.
