

TRACES OF TERROR: THE WHITE HOUSE; BUSH ASKS LEADERS IN 3 KEY NATIONS FOR IRAQ SUPPORT
By David E. Sanger
Sept. 7, 2002

President Bush called the leaders of Russia, China and France today to seek their support as he tried to build an international coalition against Saddam Hussein, but he appeared, in his initial approaches, to have made little headway in convincing them that the need for action was urgent.

Soon after his talk with Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, the Kremlin spokesman said Mr. Putin had expressed ''serious doubts that there are grounds for the use of force in connection with Iraq from the standpoint of international law or from a political standpoint.''

France's president, Jacques Chirac, insisted anew that any military action had to come with the approval of the United Nations. Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, said after meeting with Mr. Chirac that ''it would be unwise to attack Iraq now.''

But White House officials gave a different account, and cautioned against taking the public statements from Moscow and Paris too literally. A senior administration official insisted that all three leaders had indicated that they were open to hearing Mr. Bush's case for taking some kind of action to hold Iraq to the agreements it signed with the United Nations at the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Those agreements call not only for inspections, but also for limits on the range of its missiles and for ending any program to develop weapons of mass destruction.

''They all agreed that Iraq posed a threat,'' said a White House official who was familiar with the three conversations. ''They were all wrestling, however, about what to do about it, how far to go. So the president told each of them he would send a team over to make the case.''

At the United Nations next week, Mr. Bush's aides have made clear that the president will say that the organization will have to enforce the 1991 cease-fire agreement. White House officials say they have not yet decided what means the president will suggest that the United Nations use, including whether he might call for highly intrusive inspections that are backed up by military force.

But, Mr. Bush has made clear in his public statements in Washington, and yesterday in Kentucky and Indiana, that if the international community failed to respond he would have the United States take whatever steps he determined were necessary to enforce that disarmament agreement and change the leadership of Iraqi.

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain made parallel calls to world leaders today, as he prepared to fly to the United States to meet with Mr. Bush about Iraq on Saturday afternoon at Camp David. But Mr. Blair is walking a fine line between European reluctance and his own instincts to side with his greatest ally in what Mr. Bush insists is a necessary step to safeguard against terrorism.

It is clear that the two men have a lot of convincing to do, even among close allies. Today Prime Minister Jean Chrétien of Canada said he would dispute the need for an attack on Iraq when he meets with Mr. Bush in Detroit on Monday. He added that he would challenge Mr. Bush to show him proof that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction and has the capacity and will to use them.

The White House gave no independent description of the conversation with President Jiang Zemin of China, and Beijing issued no statement.

Meanwhile, the White House pressed for Congress to vote for a resolution supporting action against Iraq before it leaves Washington in October. That timetable was thrown into doubt on Thursday when the Senate majority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said he was ''more concerned about getting this done right than getting it done quickly.''

Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, sidestepped a question about whether Mr. Bush believed that he reached an informal agreement with Congressional leaders on Wednesday to hold some kind of vote before they depart in October for the mid-term election campaign.

The issue arose in part because Senator Don Nickles, an Oklahoma Republican, said today that he had asked the president during a meeting at the White House, ''Do you want to get it done before we leave?'' and he said, 'Yes.' ''

''I think we should honor that request,'' Mr. Nickles said.

Some Democrats said they suspected that Mr. Bush was setting an artificial deadline to force debate of the issue before the November elections.

It is widely assumed here -- though the political thesis is unproved -- that a debate about Iraq before the elections works in favor of Republicans, while a focus on the economy would benefit Democrats.

In the White House, a debate is still under way about exactly what strategy Mr. Bush should pursue at the United Nations on Thursday, where he is planning to speak on Thursday. He will also be meeting the leaders of Japan, Pakistan and India, along with President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan, who narrowly escaped an assassination attempt on Thursday.

One camp in the administration, led by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, has urged that the United States demand one more time that arms inspectors be let into Iraq, fully expecting that Mr. Hussein will delay or impede those inspections. Another camp, including Vice President Dick Cheney, has warned that over-involving the United Nations is a trap, and that Mr. Hussein would drag out the inspection process, playing a cat-and-mouse game while the West was paralyzed in inaction.

One of Mr. Bush's aides compared the current debate to last year's arguments over missile defense and Mr. Bush's resolve to pull out of the Antiballistic Missile Treaty with Russia. ''The president was told everyone will oppose you, you will damage important alliances,'' the aide said. ''But little by little, the arguments melted away.''

In this case, however, the objections to the president's approach go far beyond Europe. The Arab nations have expressed strong objections. Today President Kim Dae Jung of South Korea told foreign correspondents that the administration had ignored him in consultations and said ''the most difficult question'' was whether his government would support the United States in Iraq.

Mr. Kim's fear is that pre-emptive strike on Iraq would undercut his efforts to reach a peace accord with North Korea, which Mr. Bush has identified as part of the ''axis of evil,'' along with Iran and Iraq.
