

THREATS AND RESPONSES: U.N. TEAM; Chief Weapons Inspectors See No Big Breakthrough After Talks in Baghdad
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 10, 2003

The top United Nations weapons inspectors said tonight that they had achieved no breakthrough in two days of talks here, ending inconclusively a last-hour visit in which they had hoped Iraq would demonstrate more significantly its full cooperation with inspectors.

''Breakthrough is too strong a word for what we are seeing,'' Hans Blix, the chief inspector for biological and chemical weapons, said tonight.

Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, his counterpart for nuclear weapons, said: ''The point we impressed on Iraq is that we need to see quick progress, drastic change. As I mentioned before, something spectacular has to happen.''

Even as he sought to sound upbeat, Dr. ElBaradei characterized the talks this weekend -- as American officials warned that the time for diplomacy was ending -- as only ''the beginning of a change of heart on the part of the Iraqis.''

It is far from clear that anything Iraq offered this weekend would weaken the Bush administration's resolve to use military force to rid Iraq of what the White House says are continuing stocks of weapons of mass destruction. Gen. Amir al-Saadi, Saddam Hussein's top science adviser, suggested as much when he said tonight that he expected at least ''the fair-minded'' -- in which he presumably did not include the United States -- to conclude that Iraq was doing all it could to cooperate with the inspectors.

The inspectors, who advocate longer inspections as an alternative to an American military attack, had held high expectations for what might be their last talks here, as they prepared to deliver another report to the Security Council, in just five days, on Iraq's cooperation so far with the renewed inspections.

While Iraq still has several days to sway that report -- which is likely to weigh heavily on whether the Security Council authorizes military force against Iraq -- the talks here appeared to fall short.

Two important procedural points of the inspections went unsettled: whether Iraq would allow surveillance by American U-2 spy planes -- perhaps with aircraft from Germany, France and Russia -- and whether Iraq would pass legislation banning weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Blix characterized progress on a third -- private interviews with Iraqi scientists which began this week -- as ''a mixed bag.''

On the larger question of disarmament itself, Iraq did provide new documents to respond to inspectors' questions about how it says it disposed of its stores of anthrax and the VX nerve agent. Mr. Blix suggested that the papers, most of them not original documents, did not seem to go far enough, though he said experts were still analyzing them.

''They are welcome but they are not, as yet, an answer to everything,'' he said.

Despite the inspectors' question marks, General Saadi said Iraq had taken substantial steps to show greater cooperation this weekend. The new documents, he said, ''did not leave anything unanswered, even the trivial issues.'' He also noted that Iraq had agreed this weekend to a commission that would search for other documents on weapons programs.

He said he also expected that Iraq would agree in the next few days on the two procedural points left open today.

''All this -- if that is not spectacular,'' he said, borrowing Dr. ElBaradei's word, ''I don't know what is.''

With much public opposition around the world to an attack by the United States, General Saadi, in his references to ''the fair-minded,'' seemed to be referring to nations on the Security Council, like France and Russia, that are pushing for a more extensive inspection program rather than a war.

Indeed, the real question for Iraq is how the report by Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei will play in the Security Council. A negative report may make it harder for wavering countries to oppose a new resolution authorizing military force.

Almost two weeks ago, Mr. Blix delivered a report that was largely negative in its assessment of Iraq's cooperation -- and last week he warned that Iraq risked another one if it did not substantially alter its attitude.

Tonight, Mr. Blix declined to speculate on the tone of his imminent report.

But Dr. ElBaradei said he believed that the inspections here would continue as long as Iraq made ''quick progress'' in its level of cooperation. ''The ball is very much in Iraq's court,'' he said. ''As long as we're negotiating good progress, I think the Security Council, in my opinion, will continue to support the inspections process.''

Since the start of the new confrontation with the United States, Iraq has repeatedly denied that it has any more weapons of mass destruction or programs to develop them. Since the United Nations inspectors returned here in late November, they have said they have found no ''smoking gun'' suggesting that Iraq does in fact have any such weapons.

But the question of Iraq's overall cooperation has been more complicated. In general, Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei have praised Iraq for allowing immediate access to any site that inspectors requested to visit.

They have, however, complained about a range of other shortcomings. Those cover the way the inspectors carry out their day-to-day duties, as well as the broader question of whether Iraq has indeed destroyed weapons and chemical and biological agents and has not renewed its nuclear program.

As a condition for returning for talks here, United Nations officials said they believed that they had assurances that Iraq was willing to tackle three of the more procedural questions. But the talks today ended only with progress, though no firm agreements, and on only the two issues, not all three.

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei are scheduled to leave Iraq on Monday morning.

This week, under much pressure after Secretary of State Colin L. Powell's appearance before the Security Council, Iraq bowed to a major demand of the inspectors and said several scientists would agree to be interviewed without an Iraqi government witness present. But Mr. Blix did not characterize even this as an unqualified success. Of five scientists requested for private interviews since Thursday, three have agreed.

Also today, inspectors found another empty chemical weapons shell, bringing to 18 the number found, 4 of them by Iraqis themselves, in the last month. General Saadi said tonight that a new document showed that 20 of the warheads were produced in 1999 for research and development and that the remaining 2 were destroyed.
