
A NATION AT WAR: THE NORTHERN FRONT

A NATION AT WAR: THE NORTHERN FRONT; In Iraq's Kurdish Zone, Anti-Hussein Forces Wait for U.S.
By C. J. Chivers With David Rohde
March 21, 2003

As war to oust Saddam Hussein from power began, the military power aligned against him in northern Iraq was almost nonexistent today, a tiny showing of poorly equipped indigenous gunmen sitting opposite a large Iraqi force.

Kurds were still waiting to see if the United States would open a conventional northern front, which remained a possibility today after the Turkish Parliament voted to allow American planes to fly through Turkish airspace into Iraq. The vote would allow the Pentagon to airlift troops into Kurdish territory, should it choose to do so.

In the interim, Kurdish fighters were a portrait of both confusion and restraint.

The shooting today was light and sporadic, and in places there was no firing at all. But some Kurds worried that their side of the lines, almost empty, left them vulnerable to Iraqi action and unprepared to check the potential for opportunism, looting and vengeance killings by civilians as the war goes forward.

''The problem is that nobody knows what is going on,'' said one senior Kurdish official and guerrilla veteran, who spoke on the condition that he not be identified. ''To fight you need a plan. Right now no one knows the plan.'' The contrast with the southern front in Kuwait, where the United States and Britain have assembled powerful columns of armor, infantry and artillery, could not have been stronger.



The two principal Kurdish political parties, which have administered a region that broke away from the Baghdad government in 1991, have long claimed as many as 50,000 regular fighters between them, and almost as many in reservist militias. The fighters are called pesh merga, meaning ''those who face death.''

But for all of the pesh merga's considerable reputation as guerrillas, they hardly showed up for the first day of the war, a turnout suggesting that the Kurds have exaggerated their strength.

Those who appeared were operating with no apparent supervision and little ammunition. They mostly milled about.

In this front-line city, for instance, only three fighters could be found at a hilltop fortress that faced the forward elements of an Iraqi corps.

The defense of the city was otherwise left to 250 police officers and customs agents, who were armed with nothing more than rifles and a few light machine guns. They sat in clusters talking, wondering what to do and assuming that American pressure would make the Iraqi government fall.

One senior Kurdish military official said he had not given his fighters instructions except to stay in garrisons, typically miles from the front.

''We didn't move them forward because we don't know yet what is going to happen,'' said Gen. Mustafa Said Qadir, the military commander for the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, which controls the eastern half of the Kurdish zone.

Massoud Barzani, president of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which controls the western zone, described similar instructions earlier this week. ''Their movement will depend on the developments that take place,'' he said. ''Right now their orders are to stay in place.''

Mr. Barzani left open the possibility that his forces might play a larger role. ''Where there is a vacuum, whether political or not, our forces will act,'' he said. ''Our forces are not only confined to the Kurdish areas.''

Kurdish officials said the reasons for the pesh merga's absence from battle today were political and practical.

Kurds are wary of disobeying the United States, which has asked them not to go on the offensive and risk provoking Turkey. The Turkish government worries that Kurdish successes in Iraq could fuel nationalist Kurdish feelings among the Turks' own large Kurdish minority.

Of particular concern is the city of Kirkuk, just a 20-minute drive from here, on the Iraqi side of the front.

Turkey has warned the Kurds to stay clear of the city and its vast oil fields. ''We know it is a very sensitive issue,'' said Simko Diyazee, chief of the Patriotic Union's general staff.

The absence of Kurdish fighters also left a potential vacuum, one that filled some Kurds with worry.

Up and down a 35-mile stretch of the front line outside the Iraqi-controlled city of Mosul, Kurdish men asked where American forces were today. They said they were vulnerable to Iraqi attack and thought American troops, should they be deployed here, would prevent the situation from descending into chaos.

''If there were American soldiers here, people will feel peace and feel secure,'' said Mazin Hamad, mayor of the village of Bardarash. ''We have a very, very small number of pesh merga.''

The vacuum presented opportunities to exploit. Back near the Kirkuk line, Muhammad Haji Mahmud, general secretary of the Kurdistan Social Democrat Party, said he planned to send 1,000 fighters to the front, and perhaps into Kirkuk later.

He also said he had already negotiated the surrender of some Iraqi units, who would defect in the coming days. His statements underscored the tenuous hold on control and unity here, in a land with several armed factions and a range of ambitions.

Senior Kurdish officials also said they were not able to focus entirely on the war against Iraq, because they faced other military worries.

The Kurdistan Democratic Party has deployed some fighters to monitor an expected Turkish incursion into northern Iraq. And General Qadir of the Patriotic Union said he had sent a large portion of his forces near the village of Halabja to the front with Ansar al-Islam, a militant Islamic group that the United States contends is an affiliate of Al Qaeda.

Seven thousand pesh merga were gathered at that front today, he said, preparing for a battle that he expected would include American airstrikes and American ground forces fighting beside Kurds.

Only a small contingent of Special Forces soldiers are working with the pesh merga there now. The general said he expected that battle to begin within a week, after more American troops arrive.

By dusk, along a wide stretch of the front line, men had gathered in the light rain around burning tires to celebrate the eve of Nowruz, the new year holiday observed by Kurds, Iranians and many Afghans. They joked and smiled. Aras Khdir, 19, one of three Kurdish fighters on duty in a small hilltop fort, was grinning beside a richly smoking fire. His hair and face were wet.

''We are enjoying everything,'' he said, ''because it is Nowruz and the end of Saddam Hussein.''
