

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE AFTERMATH; Rift Over Plan to Impose Rule on Iraq
By James Dao and Eric Schmitt
Oct. 10, 2002

The Bush administration is considering plans to create a provisional government for Iraq that could provide a base for opposition to President Saddam Hussein and form the core of a new government if Mr. Hussein is ousted, senior administration officials said.

But the proposal, which is being pushed by several Iraqi exile groups has received mixed reaction inside the administration. It has strong support among Pentagon officials, who want to incorporate it into invasion plans. But the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency have been cool to the idea.

One proposal calls for American troops to seize and defend territory inside Iraq where exile groups could set up an interim capital before or during an invasion to topple Mr. Hussein. Proponents contend that creating an alternative government on Iraqi soil would encourage military commanders and government officials to break with Mr. Hussein during the initial phases of an attack. That, they argue, could hasten the collapse of the Baghdad government.

''It's like the role of the French resistance during World War II,'' said one Iraqi opposition leader. ''The United States stood up DeGaulle, gave him a P.R. role, gave him credibility, and helped establish a government the French people could rally around.''

But senior officials in the State Department and C.I.A. argue that the administration should encourage a homegrown leadership, not impose one. A provisional government would give the exile groups a head start in controlling the country's vast oil wealth, causing resentment and perhaps even civil war, they say.

''The idea of a provisional central government is just a power grab, as far as I can see,'' said a person involved in State Department planning for a post-Hussein government.

In his nationally televised speech on Monday, President Bush spoke only in broad terms about how the administration and its coalition partners would deal with a post-Hussein Iraq, a series of plans that White House officials say is still evolving.

''If military action is necessary, the United States and our allies will help the Iraqi people rebuild their economy and create the institutions of liberty in a unified Iraq at peace with its neighbors,'' Mr. Bush said.

The differences over a provisional government exemplify a rift on Iraq policy that has bedeviled the Bush administration for months and disrupted planning for reconstructing Iraq if Mr. Hussein is deposed, Iraq experts and exile leaders say.

Hawks close to the Pentagon blame the disruptions on the State Department, arguing that the agency has been slow to plan for a post-Hussein government because it dislikes the exile groups, particularly the Iraqi National Congress.

''State has been reluctant to think about Iraq after Saddam, in part because that would force them to think about who we are dealing with among the opposition,'' said Richard Perle, chairman of the Defense Policy Board, an advisory panel to Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. ''We should have developed a government in exile long ago.''

But State Department officials contend that it has been difficult to plan for a new regime because it has not been clear -- and is still not clear, they say -- how Mr. Hussein may be deposed. Planning for all those contingencies is complex and has only recently begun, the officials said.

''In the end, it's not going to be a made-in-Washington blueprint,'' the senior official said. ''Will we parachute in our government-in-exile and say, 'Here are your new rulers.'? Let's be realistic. People who are inside Iraq are going to decide Iraq's future.''

An alternative to the provisional government plan circulating in the State Department calls for creating an interim council representing Iraqis from both inside and outside the country that could help guide reconstruction. But under that plan, the central government -- and particularly the oil industry -- would be administered by the United Nations and the United States military until a democratic government could be created, a process that could take years, officials said.

''Oil is key to holding the country together,'' said one person involved in planning for a post-Hussein Iraq.

To encourage planning by the Iraqi opposition, the State Department has begun bringing together Iraqi political leaders and intellectuals to develop position papers on a range of topics, including democratic institutions, the judiciary, the media, water and agriculture, oil, health care, education and public finance.

But many Iraqi opposition leaders deride the effort as an academic exercise. The United States should be helping to organize and preparing to recognize a provisional government that can take power the moment Baghdad falls, they contend.

They want the administration to endorse a provisional government before a major conference of opposition groups that may take place in Brussels later this month. That conference is intended to demonstrate that the politically and ethnically diverse groups, who have squabbled frequently in the past, can unite behind a new government.

Meanwhile, the Pentagon has been developing its own plans for Iraq following an invasion. They include maintaining a large multinational army in Iraq for at least a year to track down and eliminate Iraq's clandestine weapons programs, ensure stability around the country and deal with potential problems in providing assistance to civilians.

In northern Iraq, military forces would probably protect the oil fields around Kirkuk and Mosul to prevent rival groups from trying to seize them. The largest foreign presence would likely be in the central part of the country around Baghdad, Mr. Hussein's power base.

In addition to military security forces, thousands of military civil affairs specialists, familiar with the linguistic and cultural differences within Iraq, would probably be deployed throughout the country, officials said.

Some influential advisers say the post-Hussein planning process is too disjointed, with State Department and Pentagon planning operating on completely separate tracks. Stephen J. Hadley, the deputy national security adviser, oversees the administration's planning.

The advisers, who include former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Mr. Perle, argue that the White House should create a high-level interagency group to coordinate the military and reconstruction planning before an invasion takes place. That sort of powerful council could overcome the bureaucratic and philosophical divisions that have hindered reconstruction planning, the advisers contend.

''It was a mistake we made in Afghanistan,'' said Mr. Gingrich, who sits on the Defense Policy Board. ''You shouldn't go into a country militarily without having thought through what it should look like afterward.''
