

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE EXILES; A Figure From Iraq's Past Steps Out to Mold Its Future
By Jane Perlez
March 16, 2003

A former Iraqi foreign minister, Adnan Pachachi, who quit when Saddam Hussein came to power and who has been in talks with Washington, said in an interview here today that he was willing to take a leadership role in post-invasion Iraq.

Mr. Pachachi presents himself as a patrician figure of independent and secular views that transcend the ethnic and religious factions that many fear could tear Iraq apart in the aftermath of war.

His father and father-in-law were prime ministers under the monarchy after Iraq's independence from Britain. Mr. Pachachi, who was educated at a private academy in Alexandria, Egypt, and whose three daughters attended an exclusive Manhattan girls school, proudly talks of being born to ''power and privilege.''

The Bush administration's special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, Zelmay Khalilzad, met with Mr. Pachachi in Washington last fall, and here in his apartment last month.

The two spoke by phone on Friday, when Mr. Pachachi said he informed Mr. Khalilzad of his plans to call a conference of what he called ''independent, secular and democratic'' Iraqis in London at the end of the month. Mr. Pachachi, who first went to Washington as a young Iraqi diplomat in 1944, has also met with senior officials at the State Department, the Pentagon and in the vice president's office.

For some officials in Washington, Mr. Pachachi is a tantalizingly attractive figure for a post-Hussein Iraq.

He is a secular Sunni Muslim opposition figure among an exile group dominated by Shiites, who have potential ties to Iran, and Kurdish groups that already govern northern Iraq.

He appeals to Arab governments in the region who are nervous about an occupation of Iraq by the American military and rule by an American general. Some State Department officials see him as a counterweight to Ahmad Chalabi, the chairman of the Iraqi National Congress, who is a Shiite and a favorite of the Pentagon for a prominent position if Mr. Hussein is ousted.

Mr. Pachachi left Iraq in 1969 and has not set foot there since. He has no following inside Iraq. But his maturity, his evident patriotism, and his apparently selfless motives could make him a rallying point for Iraqis, American officials said.

He was the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations from 1959 to 1965, and again from 1967 to 1969, and foreign minister from 1965 to 1967.

In an interview in his well-appointed apartment in the capital of this oil-rich nation, Mr. Pachachi made clear that his views for a new Iraq did not entirely conform with the announced plans of the Bush administration. But his ideas were not set in stone, either, he said.

First, he was not enthusiastic about the American military running Iraq, he said.

''The United Nations should be brought into the operation,'' he said. ''The U.N. is more acceptable to the Iraqis, to the region and internationally.''

Second, he said, Iraqis should be given real responsibility in the civilian administration of the country in the early days of a post-Hussein administration, and not just advisory roles as envisioned by Bush officials.

''The Iraqis are able to run their own affairs,'' he said. ''We are not like Afghanistan. We have thousands of experienced people who can run the country.''

Moreover, he said, having Iraqis running Iraq would help soften the resentment and hostility toward Americans that would be likely to set in after some early euphoria. ''If there is going to be a welcome in the beginning, it may turn into something else,'' Mr. Pachachi warned.

Third, he said that the Iraqi Army should be used early on. ''The Iraqi army is not loyal to Saddam Hussein,'' he said. ''Some units of the Republican Guard and some units of the Special Forces are loyal. The bulk of the Iraqi Army could be used effectively for maintenance of law and order.''

Over all, Mr. Pachachi emphasized that those now in Iraq should be consulted and must take part in the formation of an interim administration.

The goal of this interim group would be to ''shorten the military rule,'' keep the territorial integrity of Iraq, and prepare for elections under a new constitution. The country should be run along the lines of its 18 provinces, he said, not on an ethnic basis of a Kurdish north, a Sunni center and a Shiite south.

This and many of his other ideas are similar to those of two veteran American diplomats, Edward P. Djerejian, a former ambassador to Syria, and Frank G. Wisner, a former ambassador to India, who recently published a blueprint for the reconstruction of Iraq under the auspices of the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy at Rice University.

For much of his time in exile, Mr. Pachachi served as the foreign affairs adviser to the government of the United Arab Emirates. He now has Emirates citizenship.

After his job with the Emirates government, Mr. Pachachi wrote a memoir ''Voice of Iraq at the United Nations,'' published in English in 1990. In that book, Mr. Pachachi said he outlined his ideas about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. He wrote that a ''viable'' Palestinian state should be created on the West Bank and Gaza. ''It has always been my view that there should be a two state solution,'' he said. ''That is now official American policy.''

Mr. Pachachi has been criticized for asserting during his tenure as Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations that Kuwait was part of Iraq. ''I was representing the view of the Iraqi government then,'' he said. In 1963, Iraq recognized Kuwait. He visited Kuwait as Iraqi foreign minister in 1966 and 1967, he said.

His age -- he will be 80 in May -- makes it unlikely that he would be a long-term prospect for leadership.

Mr. Pachachi said his wife, Selwa, had told him that she was dead-set against his new involvement in Iraq. They married at the Iraqi Embassy in Washington in 1944 when Mrs. Pachachi's father, Ali Jawdat Ayoubi, was the Iraqi ambassador to the United States. They have three daughters who all attended the Brearley School in New York City.

Despite his wife's protests, Mr. Pachachi said he was eager to help the rebirth of his country. In the end, said a State Department official, Mr. Pachachi's role could be not so much ''king as kingmaker.''
