

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Experts See High Risk of Strife In Iraq if Hussein Is Deposed
By Ian Fisher
March 1, 2003

With war creeping ever closer, American officials and even some of Iraq's Muslim neighbors may still hold out hope that President Saddam Hussein can be persuaded to step down or even that he will be toppled from power.

But experts on Iraq say the chances that Mr. Hussein will leave, on his own or because of a coup, remain very remote. The Iraqi leader has appeared composed and shows no sign of any readiness to go or any nervousness at the extent of internal opposition.

But if he does leave, the outcome may be messy, unpredictable and very violent as old scores, suppressed by the governing Baath Party for more than three decades, are settled. ''You have to anticipate that there is a high risk'' of violence, said Judith Yaphe, senior research fellow at the National Defense University in Washington. ''A lot of it will depend on how much law and order is controlled as quickly as possible by whatever follows the day after. That will be critical.''

In case of war, the task of imposing order would almost certainly fall -- at least in the immediate term -- to an American general, an option that would not be popular even among the millions in this proud nation who harbor little love for Mr. Hussein. Short of that, many experts agree that it is hard to imagine what satisfying alternative can emerge within a government that has been kept in place for 24 years by Mr. Hussein's absolute power.

At the top of a list of questions is whether any new government will pass muster for the kind of ''regime change'' that Washington says it is determined to see. Would a new government, unvanquished in war, be any more willing to give up forbidden weapons that the Bush administration says Iraq has?

Could a democratic leader emerge in this deeply divided nation, which many Iraqis themselves believe requires a strong, even autocratic, leader to stay united? Who, even far down the ranks beneath Mr. Hussein, is untainted by the workings of a security apparatus that by any measure is one of the most pervasive in the world?

While Mr. Hussein does rely on a cadre of competent technocrats, who have helped overcome the devastation of two wars and 12 years of international isolation, there are no voices of opposition, let alone opposition parties.

Whatever the uncertainties, many leaders appear to have concluded that it is worth exploring means to oust Mr. Hussein from within if the alternative is all-out war.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld has said that Mr. Hussein may be able to escape war crimes charges if he finds a safe haven in another country. ''I think that that would be a fair trade to avoid a war,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said last month.

But experts note that Mr. Hussein is a man concerned about his place in Arab history -- citing the palaces, mosques and monuments rising around Baghdad as evidence -- and that stepping down could be a fatal cut to his honor.

In a nation where Mr. Hussein claimed to have won 100 percent of the vote in the last election, many Iraqis say he should not step down in the face of an invasion. ''I think his character is almost the same as any Iraqis,'' said Abdulwahab al-Qassab, a political scientist at the University of Baghdad, who said most Iraqis would never consent to be ruled by foreigners.

It is also hard to find anyone who will dare speculate what Iraq may look like after Mr. Hussein. But outside experts say the nightmare chain of events will be that the Baath Party will collapse quickly and completely and Iraq will tumble into civil war, with its deep divisions between the Kurds, Arabs, Sunni Muslims and Shiite Muslims.

That possibility preyed on the minds of the administration of President Bush's father when it decided not to pursue the Persian Gulf war of 1991 to the point of ridding Iraq of Mr. Hussein.

If the nation holds together without Mr. Hussein, experts do not rule out a period of extreme violence as groups vie for power and position. Others say that even if Mr. Hussein can be persuaded to go, he will try to leave power in the hands of one of his aides or his younger son, Qusay, 36.

A recent report by the Congressional Research Service identified Izzat Ibrahim, vice chairman of the nation's top governing body, the Revolutionary Command Council, and Taha Yassin Ramadan, the country's first vice president, as other possible candidates.

''This is a relatively problematic scenario for Washington,'' said Jeremy Binnie, Middle East editor of Jane's Sentinel, which analyzes the risks of conflicts around the world. ''That doesn't constitute regime change. What the Americans will be looking for, if there is that kind of pushing out or coup, is to basically engage with the new regime to be sure that they would disarm.''

Most experts interviewed agree that it is unlikely that the Bush administration will accept any new leader from Mr. Hussein's inner circle. In fact, American officials have said that at least the top 12 officials in Mr. Hussein's ruling circle, whom they often call the ''dirty dozen,'' should face war crimes trials in Iraq. The list includes Qusay Hussein and his older brother, Uday, as well as Mr. Ibrahim and Mr. Ramadan.

Some experts and diplomats say the list was deliberately kept short to encourage officials just outside the inner circle to rebel, by alerting them to the possibility that the alternative may be death in war or trial afterward. But there have been many attempts at coups before, and all have been crushed.

For his part, Mr. Hussein has never directly addressed in public the question of stepping aside. He has appeared on television often recently, rallying top army commanders and mingling with younger soldiers, as he vows to resist the ''evil aggression'' of the United States.

But there was one recent tantalizing item in the English-language Iraq Daily. In a meeting with commanders, Mr. Hussein evoked the ancient legend of King Gilgamesh. The king, Mr. Hussein was paraphrased as saying, ''gave up the helm and left his Senate leading the country till his coming back.''
