

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Feud Between Kurdish Clans Creates Its Own War
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 24, 2003

One threat to stability in Iraq after any war to remove Saddam Hussein takes the form of a dapper 45-year old man, educated in the United States and fluent in English, who has a yen for cologne, pressed shirts and silk ties.

His name is Najat al-Sourchi. He is planning what would be a deeply destabilizing murder.

Mr. Sourchi wants to kill Massoud Barzani, an American ally and president of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which has played host to Central Intelligence Agency teams in northern Iraq since last fall.

Many people here regard Mr. Barzani as a resistance hero, the embodiment of a surname synonymous with the Kurdish autonomy struggle, which Mr. Sourchi himself supports.

This high place in local lore matters not to Mr. Sourchi. He is a Kurd who wants a Kurdish leader dead.

''I want Massoud's head,'' he said.

Much of northern Iraq is talking peace these days, of unifying opposition groups pledged to defeat Mr. Hussein, and of reconciling tensions lingering from the Kurdish civil war.

The former combatants in that fratricidal fight in the 1990's, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, have achieved a degree of peace, and are showing signs of cooperation as American forces build in the region, preparing to unseat their common enemy in Baghdad. They are to be hosts of an opposition conference set to begin in Erbil any day.

But beneath this sense of common purpose, tensions simmer from years of plotting, counterplotting and bloodletting.

Mr. Sourchi is consumed by a blood feud, and has sworn to avenge the death in 1996 of his uncle, Hussein Agha al-Sourchi, 65, for which he blames Mr. Barzani. It is one of several feuds that exist beneath the businesslike dialogue of changing Iraq, and is a worrisome indicator of the fragility of peace in a land where even people with common goals are intent on settling old scores.

''This is a place where ancient rivalries and practices do not die quickly,'' said Barham Salih, prime minister of the eastern Kurdish zone. ''There are lots of animosities that may come to the fore after Saddam is gone.''

During the decades of dictatorial rule before Kurds broke free of Mr. Hussein in an uprising after the Persian Gulf war in 1991, many Kurdish tribes served the Baghdad government. They formed military units, known as jash, which sometimes fought other Kurds, including the Bazarnis, who led much of the Kurdish resistance to Baghdad. One of the jash tribes was the Sourchis.

In a gesture of reconciliation after the uprising in 1991, when Mr. Hussein's army withdrew from northern Iraq, the Kurdish resistance granted amnesty to most jash, including the Sourchis, who controlled a network of villages along a strategic road through Iraq's northern mountains.

When the civil war between Kurds broke out in 1994, however, loyalties shifted anew.

In 1996, the Barzanis accused the Sourchis of collaborating with the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. On June 16 of that year Barzani fighters advanced on this village, hoping to capture Najat's brother, Zayed, who they said was spying for the other side.

Nearly seven years later, details of the fight and the sacking of several Sourchi homes that ensued are still in dispute. But no one disputes that Hussein Agha al-Sourchi, the tribal elder, was fatally shot by Barzani fighters. Thirteen Barzani fighters were also killed. Zayed al-Sourchi, whom the Barzanis still say was a spy, escaped.

The Barzanis have expressed regret about the death of the Sourchi chief, saying he was not the target of the raid. ''I was sorry before and I am sorry now that that happened,'' Mr. Barzani said.

Najat and Zayed say that regret is not enough and that Mr. Barzani must publicly accept responsibility and apologize.

They also want to kill Nerchervan Barzani, Massoud Barzani's nephew and the prime minister of the western Kurdish zone, who they say helped plan the raid.

After the killing, many Sourchis remained in or near Kalakin, and some are loyal to Mr. Barzani. Ali Hussein al-Sourchi, a lawyer, recently walked among ruined houses and said what befell the tribal leaders was their own fault, because they were jash working for the Iraqi government. ''They hurt the people of this area so much,'' he said.

Other Sourchis joined the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. They now live in internal exile in Sulaimaniya, where they claim to have 706 gunmen on their payroll, some of whom provide military support to Jalal Talabani, the head of the Patriotic Union.

From a heavily guarded house in Sulaimaniya, Najat al-Sourchi says it is the Barzanis who are jash, noting that they invited Mr. Hussein's army to attack Erbil in 1996 when the civil war against Mr. Talabani's fighters was going badly.

''How could a man who says he is a Kurdish hero collaborate with Saddam Hussein?'' he said. ''I ask this: Who is the real jash?''

The Sourchis' reassertion of the feud has baffled and angered many Kurdish officials, who say it is badly timed. Kurds are trying to show unity now, not fractures in their ranks.

''These people should be quiet,'' said Sami Abdul Rahman, one of Mr. Barzani's closest confidants.

Mr. Barzani, as the leader of a principal political party and the de facto commander of a local army tens of thousands strong, is indisputably important to the future of Iraq.

He expressed exasperation at the Sourchis' call for his head, describing Najat as ''somebody who was brought up with the milk of treachery and treason.''

But he chose a calmer path, offering to let the exiled tribesmen return to their village and suggesting he was too well guarded to be killed by Najat al-Sourchi. ''We have opened a new page,'' he said. ''He knows very well he cannot assassinate me, and I do not want to kill him.''

Mr. Sourchi rejects talk of truce. ''There is blood between us, and every day, every minute of every day, I think of killing him,'' he said. ''It is like a dream in my mind.''

Still, in quiet moments, sipping tea and talking softly, he sometimes reflects about the sadness of it all. ''I'm not saying this is good, but it is the tradition of Kurdistan,'' he said. ''I know it is not good.''
