

TRACES OF TERROR: THE WHITE HOUSE; PRESIDENT TO SEEK CONGRESS'S ASSENT OVER IRAQ ACTION
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Sept. 5, 2002

President Bush said today that he would seek approval from Congress before taking action against Iraq, as the White House opened a campaign to persuade lawmakers, reluctant allies and the public that Saddam Hussein poses a grave danger to the United States and the world.

Leaders of the House and Senate who were briefed on the president's position today said they were pleased to be consulted, but that neither the president nor his Defense Secretary, Donald H. Rumsfeld, had presented any new evidence that the threat from Mr. Hussein was imminent. After Mr. Bush met this morning at the White House with a bipartisan group of Congressional leaders, Mr. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, spoke to senators in a closed meeting on Capitol Hill.

Mr. Bush said he would meet this weekend at Camp David with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain for a strategy session on making the case internationally against Mr. Hussein. The president said he would present that case in a speech next Thursday to the United Nations General Assembly and that he would talk by telephone before then with Presidents Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Jiang Zemin of China and Jacques Chirac of France.

At the same time, he said that his administration would ''fully participate'' in any hearings that Congress wished to have on Iraq. [Excerpts, Page A14.]

Congressional leaders and administration officials indicated that they expected a vote on a resolution on Iraq in four to five weeks.

The administration also sought to dispel any signs of division as Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, speaking to reporters in Johannesburg, said again today that he did not fundamentally disagree with the position of Vice President Dick Cheney, who said last week that Iraq was close to developing a nuclear bomb and that sending in United Nations weapons inspectors -- as Mr. Powell would like -- was a waste of time.

Secretary Powell said he supported weapons inspections if only as a means of building an international coalition to act against Iraq if Mr. Hussein did not let the inspectors in.

''For 11 long years, Saddam Hussein has sidestepped, crawfished, wheedled out of any agreement he had made not to harbor, not to develop weapons of mass destruction, agreements he's made to treat the people within his country with respect,'' Mr. Bush said after the meeting with Congressional leaders. ''And so I'm going to call upon the world to recognize that he is stiffing the world.''

In a letter today to J. Dennis Hastert, the speaker of the House, Mr. Bush said he would seek Congressional support for action ''to do whatever is necessary to deal with the threat posed by Saddam Hussein's regime.''

Mr. Bush's campaign to rally opinion against Mr. Hussein comes after weeks of complaints from allies about conflicting signals on Iraq and an acknowledgment this week from senior administration officials that the White House lost control of the debate in August. Today, Mr. Bush tried to put himself squarely in the front of that debate.

''I believe it's really important for the United States Congress to have an open dialogue about how to deal with this threat,'' he said. ''This is the debate the American people must hear, must understand. And the world must understand as well that its credibility is at stake.''

Mr. Bush did not indicate whether he would support sending inspectors into Iraq, and Congressional leaders said he did not make his position clear in his meeting with them.

White House officials said the president wanted the Congressional resolution to include the option of military action, even though they said that he had not yet decided on a course of action. Some Congressional leaders said, however, that it was inevitable and that Mr. Bush appeared to be leaning in that direction.

''I believe there will be strong support for Congressional approval for the president to take whatever action necessary for regime change in Iraq,'' said Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who is a proponent of action against Mr. Hussein.

But other Congressional leaders warned that Mr. Bush had to be more forthcoming with any new information on Iraq, and that he needed to answer many questions.

''What new information exists?'' Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic majority leader, said after the meeting with Mr. Bush. ''What threat can be quantified? What has changed in recent months or years? What will be the reaction of our allies? How much will it cost? If we change regimes, who will be in the new regime and has that been thought through?''

Mr. Daschle added that he was worried about ''the politicization of this issue,'' and cited ''skeptics out there who wonder to what extent the political implications of any of this may effect'' this fall's mid-term elections.

Other Congressional leaders said Mr. Bush and Mr. Rumsfeld had suggested that new intelligence about Mr. Hussein's nuclear abilities might be forthcoming, either in Mr. Bush's speech to the General Assembly or in Congressional testimony by administration officials.

''The inference to be drawn from his comments was that there was more information, and he would share it with the Congress,'' said Representative Nancy Pelosi, Democrat of California and a member of the Intelligence Committee.

CBS News tonight, citing a note-taker who it said sat in on meetings held by Mr. Rumsfeld in the hours after the Sept. 11 attacks, reported that the defense chief had asked for plans to be drawn up then for a retaliatory attack against Iraq, even though it was not clear at the time that Mr. Hussein was linked to the hijackings. Senior military officials said they could not recall Mr. Rumsfeld's uttering such words.

Senate Republicans said hearings on Iraq could begin in the Armed Services Committee right after the president's speech at the United Nations. Committee officials were discussing with administration aides today who might testify, and when.

In 1990, when Mr. Bush's father was president, the Senate Armed Services Committee opened the first of nine hearings on Iraq on Sept. 11. The first witnesses were Mr. Cheney, then secretary of defense, and General Powell, then chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
