

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Powell Says U.S. Can Wage War on Iraq Without Turks
By Steven R. Weisman
March 5, 2003

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said today that the United States would make plans to wage war against Iraq without Turkish help if the government in Ankara did not reverse its refusal to take part ''in the next several days.''

Speaking at a moment of extraordinary tension between Turkey and the United States, Mr. Powell said that although ''we were disappointed in the Turkish votes,'' the United States military was ''flexible enough'' to handle an invasion of Iraq with or without the Turks.

His remarks came as Turkish officials said there would probably not be a vote on the issue until an election of several parliamentary seats on Sunday was concluded.

Secretary Powell said that no matter what happened, the United States and Turkey would remain ''close friends for many years in the future.''

But State Department officials acknowledged that the Turkish refusal had strained relations and left top aides to President Bush somewhat uncertain how to proceed. ''There is not a definitive plan on exactly what happens next,'' said one department official, speaking on condition of anonymity.

One of the problems, officials said, was that Turkey's governing Justice and Development Party, which came to power at the end of last year, was still too inexperienced to be able to count votes in Parliament or even within its own caucus.

Just before Turkish lawmakers voted down a proposal to allow the United States to use Turkey for a second front in the war against Iraq -- in return for an aid package of roughly $15 billion in grants and loans -- Turkish leaders assured American officials that the measure would be passed.

''They were quite confident,'' the State Department official said. The official added that aides to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the party leader, were not even able to tell American officials exactly why the vote failed.

The official suggested that Mr. Erdogan had failed to impose party discipline on the members and overlooked the impact of abstentions. The Turkish Constitution requires that a measure be approved by a majority of those present.

Although there were more yes votes than no votes, there were so many abstentions that the measure failed by that standard.

American officials say there is no deadline for Turkey to decide. But Mr. Powell's comments suggested that something had to be decided by next week, when a resolution may come before the United Nations Security Council. Mr. Powell's timetable contrasts with the one put forward by Turkey, where officials say they need two weeks to turn Parliament around.

Those officials also said there was no fallback package of arrangements with Turkey if this one failed. If Turkey does not reverse the vote, the State Department official said, the aid package and other parts of the agreement are ''off the table.''

Many experts are already assessing the failure to persuade Turkey to accept the deal as an embarrassing setback for Secretary Powell.

A Turkish official said it was a situation that had occurred because of the need for speed on the American side and the need for the new Turkish government to sort its way through several pressing problems -- particularly a disastrous economy -- before it could make a deal.

Administration officials say there are several obvious reasons why Turkey has refused to go along with the deal. The main one, they concede, is that opinion polls indicate that nearly 90 percent of the Turkish people oppose a war with Iraq, and a newly elected government cannot afford to defy the wishes of a majority on such a vital issue.

But officials also expressed resentment over the American insistence that, with billions of dollars in new loans, Turkey adhere to its austerity program negotiated last year with the International Monetary Fund.

The austerity measures include cutting farm subsidies, curbing wage increases, laying workers off at state-owned enterprises and cutting back on big and popular public works projects. Turks, remembering what happened after the last Persian Gulf war, feel that such harsh measures are only a prelude to worse suffering that would occur after a war.

Americans, on the other hand, say that Turkey can benefit economically if President Saddam Hussein is removed in Iraq and that, in any case, Turkey has no choice but to adopt the austerity measures because the international markets demand them.

''The bottom line,'' said an administration official, ''is that if the Turks don't meet their financial targets, the markets will batter them. If they fail on their targets and there's a conflict in Iraq, they're in a really tough position.''

The other points of contention relate to American demands that Turkish forces in Iraq be restricted to providing relief for refugees. Turkey says it will abide by such restrictions, provided there is no uprising of Kurds in northern Iraq that threatens to spill over to the Kurds of Turkey.

Just which of those factors led to the rejection of the American offer last weekend is a matter of dispute.

''You have 533 deputies voting,'' said a Turkish official. ''I'm sure each one has a different balance sheet in his or her mind.'' On top of the economic, political and military factors, he added, was the media coverage in the United States depicting Turkey in a critical light -- ''greedy Turks trying to exploit the situation,'' as the official put it.

That official said Turkey's leaders sometimes felt that the Bush administration failed to appreciate that Turkey was a democracy and that permission to use it as a base could not be worked out simply between the Pentagon and the Turkish generals with whom the American military had many decades of close ties.

''Military to military, they speak the same language, they work out their scenarios,'' said the Turkish official. ''But ultimately it's the political authority that must take responsibility. The administration could have done a better job understanding that fact. They were told again and again this would not be an easy thing to do.''

But within the Bush administration the mood has been one of frustration and puzzlement. ''No question there was serious disappointment,'' said a State Department official. ''There is still a desire to see what might be possible.'' But officials say they are not confident of success.
