

Saudis Warn Against Attack on Iraq by the United States
By Michael R. Gordon
March 17, 2002

Even before Air Force Two touched down in Saudi Arabia today, Vice President Dick Cheney received an unusual public warning from the Saudi leadership that the Bush administration should put aside any plans for a military campaign against Iraq.

''I do not believe it is in the United States' interests, or the interest of the region, or the world's interest, to do so,'' Crown Prince Abdullah told ABC News. ''And I don't believe it will achieve the desired result.''

With his latest remarks, Prince Abdullah joined the chorus of Arab complaints about the Bush administration's talk of taking military action to oust Saddam Hussein and put an end to his programs to develop weapons of mass destruction. At virtually every stop in the Arab world, Mr. Cheney has been told that an American military strike would destabilize the region. The warnings have been made in news conferences, government statements and, in the case of Saudi Arabia, television interviews.

At one stop on Mr. Cheney's Middle East trip, his alert about the threat of weapons of mass destruction struck a chord. But that stop was on the aircraft carrier John C. Stennis, prowling the Arabian sea, where Mr. Cheney was preaching to the converted.

American officials said before Mr. Cheney's trip to the Middle East that they thought Arab leaders would eventually acquiesce in an American military campaign against Iraq, even if they made a public show of disapproving of it. But the persistence and calculated nature of Arab response show how Middle East politics has intruded in Mr. Cheney's mission.

Mr. Cheney met this evening with King Fahd and later with Prince Abdullah, who became the de facto ruler of the country after King Fahd had a stroke in 1995. Neither Mr. Cheney nor any of his senior aides spoke to journalists today about the Arab reaction to American concerns about Iraq.

Arab leaders were generally making two points.

First, they were stating their strong preference that the Bush administration drop its campaign against Iraq for fear that it would stir Arab public opinion not only against the United States but also against the Arab governments that cooperate with Washington.

Second, they were sending Washington a signal that Arab concerns should be addressed first to make public opinion at home easier to manage if Washington moves forward nonetheless with its top priority in the region: removing Mr. Hussein from power.

''Their greatest fear is that the U.S. will invade Iraq to topple Saddam Hussein at the same time as Ariel Sharon reoccupies the West Bank,'' Martin S. Indyk, the former American ambassador to Israel, said in a telephone interview. ''They are afraid that the street will rise up in anger and that this will affect their own longevity.

''From their point of view there is a clear sequence,'' Mr. Indyk added. ''If we want them to go along with our efforts on Saddam Hussein they want us to at least get the Israel-Palestinian situation under some kind of control.''

Dennis B. Ross, the former American special envoy to the Middle East, said Arab leaders were likely to be less categorical in private in opposing American action against the Hussein regime.

''In private they will not be enthusiastic about us taking on Iraq and will be making arguments against it, but they will want to hear from us what approach we have that might actually succeed,'' Mr. Ross said. ''In the end, if they see we are really going to do it, they would like it to be done in an environment that creates the least problems for them, which is another way of saying they want us to defuse the situation between the Israelis and the Palestinians.''

In addition to trying to make a visible effort to quell the IsraeliPalestinian fighting and establish a Palestinian homeland, many observers say, the Bush administration will need to make a separate push through the United Nations to persuade Iraq to allow the return of United Nations weapons inspectors.

For much of Europe as well as the Arab world, it seems that any support for military action against Iraq can come only after a determined effort to secure the admission of the weapons inspectors has failed.

''We need the most extensive political pressure to allow the United Nations to let military inspectors back into Iraq,'' the German defense minister, Rudolf Scharping, said. He told the newspaper Tagesspiegel that an American military strike should be ''the last solution.''

Mr. Cheney's meetings here come during a period of strain in American-Saudi relations. The American public is well aware that 15 of the 19 hijackers involved in the Sept. 11 attacks were Saudis. There have also been concerns that the Saudi authorities have not done enough to stem fund-raising for militants like Osama bin Laden.

The very notion that the crown prince would grant television interviews on the eve of Mr. Cheney's arrival was unusual. In them, Prince Abdullah sought to address some American concerns.

He reaffirmed the Saudi peace proposal, under which Israel would trade the territories it occupied in the 1967 war for normal relations with Arab nations. Over the last week, some Saudi officials discussed a trade in which the Israelis would be granted ''full peace'' instead of normal relations, leading to a concern that the Saudis might be backtracking on their offer.

Prince Abdullah, however, said he envisioned normal relations with Israel, including the exchange of ambassadors and trade. He said most Arab leaders had agreed to his proposal, including Syria.

''What I said was normal relations, just as we have with other countries,'' he told ABC.

In his interview, the crown prince condemned terrorism and suggested that Mr. bin Laden had been financing terrorist operations by dealing in narcotics. That claim seemed to be an attempt to deflect criticism of Saudi Arabia after reports that funds from groups based in the kingdom have been funneled to Islamic militants and terrorists.

But the crown prince had another message as well. It may not be the Saudi's last word, but it was clear. An American campaign against Saddam Hussein's regime, he repeated, ''would not serve America's interests or the interests of the world.''
