

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; IRAQ BACKS AWAY FROM U.N. DEMAND TO SET ARMS TERMS
By Julia Preston
Oct. 12, 2002

Iraq, ignoring rising global pressure for thorough inspections of its weapons programs, has backed away from agreements reached last week on minimum conditions for the inspectors to carry out their work, diplomats said today.

In a letter that became public today, Iraq did not meet a specific request to confirm agreements it made last week in Vienna with Hans Blix, the leader of the United Nations weapons inspection team. Instead, Iraq insisted on further discussions of even basic logistical arrangements.

Diplomats said the Iraqi rebuff had irritated France and Russia, veto-bearing members of the Security Council that have been resisting Washington's demand for immediate authorization to begin a military attack if the weapons inspections fail.

While Iraqi diplomats here continued to insist that they were in ''100 percent accordance'' with the inspections, American officials said the latest Iraqi move showed President Saddam Hussein's reluctance to cooperate with a probing search for his weapons of mass destruction.

''We are not surprised that once again the Iraqis want to delay and deceive,'' said Richard A. Grenell, the spokesman for John D. Negroponte, the American ambassador to the United Nations. ''We've had 16 resolutions and 11 years of playing this game, and it's time the Security Council takes action.''

The Iraqi letter gave unexpected help to Washington's campaign for a new resolution to force Iraq to allow aggressive inspections, after Congress gave President Bush the authority to go to war if Iraq does not give up its most lethal weapons to the United Nations. [Excerpts from the letter, Page A12.]

Despite sharp differences over the terms of a new resolution, all 15 Council nations are united in wanting in-depth inspections that can turn up any prohibited weapons programs in Iraq. The new resolution is certain to require far more aggressive weapons inspections than current ones, which are still guiding Mr. Blix's work.

Mr. Blix has repeatedly said the Vienna talks were to define practical procedures so there would be no disputes with Iraq once the inspections got under way. The negotiations Iraq proposed in its response appeared to be laying the ground for the kind of squabbles that slowed inspectors in the past, before they were pulled out in 1998, and which Mr. Blix hoped to avoid. Mr. Blix did not respond to requests for comment today.

The Oct. 10 letter, from Amir Hammudi al-Saadi, an adviser to the Iraqi leader, was a reply to a letter two days earlier from Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which handles nuclear inspections.

The two directors had laid out in writing what they understood to be the agreements they had reached with Iraqi officials last week, which covered basic terms like the number of inspectors, the conditions for interviews of Iraqi officials and other practical matters. They asked Iraq to confirm the agreements.

Iraq said it was ready to receive an advance team of inspectors on Oct. 19. But it did not provide the confirmation of the letter that Mr. Blix sought, agreeing only to comments he and Mr. ElBaradei made in a news conference after the Vienna talks and to notes Mr. Blix used when he reported to the Security Council on Oct. 3. The Iraqi official said other problems ''that might stand in the way of our future work'' would be resolved through ''consultations.''

Iraq also said its offer for full access for the inspectors applied only to United Nations measures ''previously in place,'' meaning that it did not agree to open Mr. Hussein's eight presidential compounds to unannounced inspections, as the United States and Britain have demanded.

Iraq repeated a suggestion it made in Vienna that the United Nations should pay for the security and other services the government will provide to the inspectors, reversing past practice, when Iraq paid the bill. Mr. Saadi said this was not a condition.

In terms that revealed the abyss that has opened between President Hussein and the Security Council, the letter also called for the United Nations to move toward lifting its severe economic sanctions on Iraq. That possibility is so remote at this point that the Council is not discussing it.

Although officials in Washington said the action would shift to the United Nations on Saturday, there was little progress on the draft resolution that the United States and Britain have proposed, as diplomats continued to talk behind scenes looking for compromise.

The United States and Britain want one resolution with rigorous inspections and a trigger for military action if Iraq does not cooperate. France has proposed two stages, leaving the authorization of force to a second Council vote.

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia also said today that he would not support mentiono of the use of force in a resolution. Mr. Putin spoke in Moscow before Russia's representatives at the United Nations had received the Iraqi letter.

Before he received his copy, Secretary General Kofi Annan, speaking at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass., said he believed the Council was leaning toward the French position.

''I think the member states want a two-stage approach: send in the inspectors. If they get in trouble, come back, and we will pass a second resolution,'' Mr. Annan said.

In response to a furor raised by his comments, Mr. Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard, said he was not endorsing any position but only describing the state of play here. He said Mr. Annan was following the intense debate but was keeping a low profile and did not want to become part of it.

''His head is down, but his hand is in,'' Mr. Eckhard said.

The Iraqi ambassador, Mohammed A. Aldouri, said after meeting with Arab nations here today that the inspectors would be welcomed in Iraq. ''We are in 100 percent accordance,'' he said, referring to what Mr. Blix told the Security Council. He did not mention Mr. Blix's letter.

The Arab nations said they saw no need for any new resolution from the Council.

''I think there is no need to jump to conclusions about the inspections,'' said Yahia Mahmassani, the Arab League representative, ''and into preparation of war that will only engulf the Middle East in violence.''
