

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ASSASSINATION; Jordan, Between Iraq and U.S., Worries About War
By Neil MacFarquhar
Nov. 1, 2002

See the article in its original context from November 1, 2002, Section A, Page 20Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
A recent political cartoon compared the current mood in Jordan toward waging war against Saddam Hussein of Iraq with feelings in 1990.

The first panel shows two Jordanians gleefully dancing in the streets at the prospect of Iraqi missiles falling on Israel, with one man chanting, ''With chemicals, Oh Saddam! With chemicals, Oh Saddam!''

The second panel, labeled 2002, shows the same two men transfixed in front of their television set, wearing gas masks as one yells, ''With diplomacy, Oh Saddam! With diplomacy, Oh Saddam!''

A certain anxiety pervades Jordan over the potential fallout from warfare erupting on yet another border, anxiety that deepened this week with the shooting death of a senior American diplomat outside his home.

People look at events like that assassination, or the violent demonstrations that rocked Amman last spring when Israeli forces moved into the West Bank, and wonder about the stability of Jordan and the region at large in the face of another war.

''The potential for the escalation of violence is real if war happens,'' said Naser M. Tahboub, a former political science professor whose company now undertakes risk analysis. ''Emotions will flare. People will see this war as unjust.''

Given its links to its neighbors, Jordan is considered more vulnerable than any other country. Concerns about stability are likely to be strongest in the royal diwan, the offices of King Abdullah II.

In 1990, King Hussein urged the world to grant the Iraqi leader more time to withdraw voluntarily from Kuwait. While not condoning the Iraqi invasion, he did not join the American-led coalition either, satisfying public opinion while antagonizing Washington and the rich Gulf Arab states.

Abdullah, who became king after his father's death in 1999, finds himself in a similar position, caught between the demands of a powerful neighbor, a powerful patron and Jordanian public opinion.

''Being Jordan is like being married to three husbands,'' Mr. Tahboub said.

Iraq provided Jordan with subsidized oil worth some $500 million last year. Openly embracing Washington might prompt Baghdad to end the arrangement, a loss that could hurt virtually every Jordanian household.

Washington has provided military and economic aid to Jordan amounting to more than $400 million for 2002.

The Jordanian public, disgusted at what it sees as the failure of the United States to rein in the violence Israel inflicts on the Palestinians, could not stomach being closely allied with Washington against an Arab state.

The young king is trying to alienate no one while signaling to the public that Jordan is likely to be best served by keeping its head down. Abdullah, ever the fan of snappy, Western-style advertising campaigns to sell policy, is pushing the slogan, ''Jordan First.''

The slogan is plastered on billboards around town, but so far has left Jordanians either perplexed or hostile. The Palestinians, who form the bulk of the 5.1 million population, read it as a vague slur that the country should favor its native Jordanians.

In 1990, Saddam Hussein captured public opinion by proclaiming that the road to liberating Jerusalem ran through Kuwait, and that Arab oil would be used to serve Arab causes. Rumors that his face had been spotted on the moon sent Jordanians into the streets to witness this auspicious omen. Few now believe his pronouncements about pursuing pan-Arab goals, but the sentiment lingers.

''Some people are ideologues and Arab nationalists and Islamists who believe the U.S. is the enemy and we should support our Arab brethren regardless of what the circumstances are,'' said George Hawatmeh, editor of the daily Al Rai. ''Plus some people think we cannot possibly side with the Americans when Saddam is giving us preferential treatment.''

The decision that Abdullah faces in positioning Jordan differs in some aspects from his father's in 1990. First, Jordan's intelligence agency has proved instrumental in tracking militant extremists, especially after Sept. 11, raising the country's stock in Washington. The military also sent a field hospital to Afghanistan during the war there.

Second, in 1994, King Hussein signed a peace treaty with Israel. The treaty never gained much resonance in Jordan because it failed to win the Palestinians a state. But it lends the monarchy some measure of insurance that Washington will help Jordan maintain stability at home.

King Abdullah has postponed parliamentary elections twice and unleashed ferocious riot policemen to suppress anti-Israeli and anti-American demonstrations that erupted in April.

Three months ago, Jordan also shuttered the bureau of Al Jazeera satellite television -- the police carting off its computer equipment. Journalists and human rights organizations critical of the government have found themselves questioned by ever more prevalent security forces.

The government contends that political freedoms can thrive only in the wake of economic improvements, which are inching upward but are not widely felt.

Jordanians in downtown Amman grumble that Saddam Hussein deserves support as the only regional leader who is not a Western puppet.

''Jordan is now an ally of the United States,'' said Amjad Awadi, a 40-year-old government employee. ''This is the biggest mistake we can make as an Arab nation.''

Also of concern is the possible reaction from Iraq. Worst-case scenarios -- as in the cartoon -- envision Iraqi missiles targeting Jordan. Many Jordanians saw the recent assassination of the American diplomat, Laurence Foley, as the work of Iraqi agents, meant as a warning against an American attack.

At present, downtown Amman seems not too distant from the long arm of Iraq's security forces. Squatting in shadow of a Roman theater, an Iraqi woman shrouded in black and selling cigarettes for 70 cents apiece predicts that Iraqis will fight for President Hussein because he never left them wanting.

''Then why are you selling cigarettes?''

''I came here for tourism, I swear,'' the woman responded.

Another Iraqi, a rail thin, 35-year-old physicist, is less enthusiastic about the Iraqi leader. ''All Iraqis are victims of the government,'' he said. ''The Iraqi people would welcome any change and would be happy to bear the consequences.''

A friend interrupted to ask if the Americans would really attack, but both men froze when another Iraqi who had been praising Mr. Hussein moments earlier snapped their picture. ''Did you see that?'' the physicist asked, running off in fruitless pursuit.
