

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INCIDENTS IN THE AIR; U.S. WARNING IRAQ OVER NEW ATTACKS ON PATROL PLANES
By Richard W. Stevenson and Thom Shanker
Nov. 19, 2002

The Bush administration warned the Iraqis today that they had breached the latest United Nations resolution by firing on American and British warplanes patrolling no-flight zones over Iraq, but it stopped short of casting the violation as sufficient reason to go to war.

Faced today with the latest in a recent string of attempts by Iraq to shoot down allied aircraft in the zones, the administration insisted that the confrontations violated terms of the resolution, adopted by the Security Council on Nov. 8. The resolution bars ''hostile acts'' toward any United Nations representative or member state seeking to uphold the world body's efforts to contain Iraqi aggression.

But the administration left its position on the seriousness of the incidents deliberately ambiguous, administration and Pentagon officials said. The administration sought both to underscore the seriousness of the threat to American and British pilots, they said, and to reserve the idea that Iraqi attacks on allied warplanes were part of a pattern of intransigence that ultimately could be used to make the case for war.

The administration also appeared to be acknowledging that it would be difficult to use confrontations between allied planes and Iraqi forces on the ground in the no-flight zones -- the equivalent of a low-level war that has been going on for years -- as the sole reason for taking new military action against Saddam Hussein. The main goal of the Security Council resolution is to require Mr. Hussein to give up any weapons of mass destruction he possesses.

Faced with the near certainty that Russia and some other countries would not agree that Iraq's firing on the patrol planes violated the resolution, administration officials said they would not bring the issue before the Security Council for the moment.

Instead, they said they would remain focused primarily on pressing Mr. Hussein to cooperate in giving up his arsenal.

United Nations weapons inspectors arrived in Iraq today to begin their search for evidence of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and programs to produce them.

''The United States believes that firing upon our aircraft in the no-fly zone, or British aircraft, is a violation -- it is a material breach,'' said Scott McClellan, a spokesman for the White House.

Mr. McClellan said President Bush's policy toward Mr. Hussein remained one of ''zero tolerance'' when it came to enforcing the resolution. Iraqi attacks on allied planes are ''something that we will assess and review'' and reserve the right to bring before the Security Council.

''But the issue here is disarmament, and this goes to the heart of the intentions of Saddam Hussein and his regime,'' Mr. McClellan said.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, in Chile for a meeting with defense ministers from the hemisphere, said today that Iraqi attacks on American and British warplanes were ''unacceptable.'' But he declined to state whether those attacks should be the impetus for war.

At the United Nations, an American official acknowledged that there was disagreement among Security Council members as to whether the Iraqi attacks amounted to a violation of the resolution.

Paragraph 8 of the resolution says, ''Iraq should not take or threaten hostile acts directed against any representative or personnel of the United Nations or of any member state taking action to uphold any Council resolution.''

''It wouldn't be our strong suit if we brought it back into the Council,'' the American official said, adding that in any case it was ''not the key element of the resolution.''

But a senior administration official noted today that one of the ideas behind Paragraph 8 was that it could apply to the no-flight zones.

The zones were established by the United States, Britain and France after the Persian Gulf war, although France no longer takes part. They are conducted without the explicit authorization of the United Nations.

In establishing the zones, American officials cited Security Council resolutions that demanded that Iraq halt the violent repression of its civilian populations in those regions -- Kurds in the north and Shiites in the south -- as well as comply with the gulf war cease-fire requirements.

The Security Council broadly authorized the use of necessary means to enforce these resolutions, which Democratic and Republican administrations have since cited as implicit authority for the no-flight zones.

Mr. Hussein's government in Baghdad has decried the missions as an illegal violation of Iraqi sovereignty.

Despite some complaints about the no-flight zones, the Security Council has never taken formal action to restrict or end the operations.

Iraq attacked American or British warplanes patrolling the no-flight zones as recently as today, military officials said, and allied forces responded.

The European Command, which operates the no-flight zone over northern Iraq, said Iraqi forces had fired antiaircraft artillery from sites northeast of Mosul. Coalition aircraft responded by dropping precision-guided munitions, a European Command statement said.

In a separate incident today, coalition warplanes struck two air defense communications facilities and one air defense radar site in southern Iraq after attacks on American or British warplanes, the United States Central Command announced.

The attack took place a day after allied aircraft dropped 120,000 leaflets over the town of Ar Rumaytha, about 100 miles southeast of Baghdad, in a continuing psychological operation to urge Iraqi military personnel not to fire at coalition warplanes, the Central Command said. The leafleting mission on Sunday, the fourth carried out in the last eight weeks, dropped fliers that said in Arabic, 'Do not track or fire on coalition aircraft,' and included a cartoon of a warplane striking a radar and missile site.

A Pentagon spokesman, Lt. Col. David Lapan of the Marines, said Iraq had fired antiaircraft artillery or surface-to-air missiles at coalition aircraft more than 30 times since the Security Council vote. The Central Command, which manages the southern no-flight zone, said in a statement that Iraqi forces had fired on allied warplanes four out of the five days since Iraq officially accepted the new resolution.

In addition to protecting minorities in northern and southern Iraq, the no-flight patrols over large swaths of Mr. Hussein's territory ''have an added benefit in intelligence and training,'' said Eliot A. Cohen, who directed the Air Force study of the Persian Gulf war bombing campaign.
