

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITARY; Britain Calls Up 1,500 Reservists For Possible Action Against Iraq
By Warren Hoge
Jan. 8, 2003

Britain today announced its first mobilization for possible military action against Iraq, calling up 1,500 reservists to join active troops and reinforcing a naval task force earmarked for the Persian Gulf with additional vessels.

Defense Secretary Geoff Hoon announced the measures in the House of Commons, where there is substantial opposition to an American-led war in Iraq, while Prime Minister Tony Blair told a gathering of the country's senior diplomats that standing by the United States was ''massively in our self-interest.''

Mr. Blair, President Bush's staunchest international ally, appeared to address considerable public skepticism about a military action in Iraq when he said he would never send British troops into a war that was wrong or unnecessary. However, he noted that ''the price of influence is that we do not leave the U.S. to face the tricky issues alone.''

Denouncing anti-Americanism as a ''foolish indulgence,'' he told a meeting of British ambassadors, ''There are not many countries who wouldn't wish for the same relationship as we have with the U.S. and that includes most of the ones most critical of it in public.''

He coupled this, however, with a pledge to use British influence with the Americans to try to ''to continue to broaden their agenda,'' particularly in the Middle East. Active engagement in pursuing an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement was essential to winning support for the drive to disarm Saddam Hussein, he said.

''The reason there is opposition over our stance on Iraq has less to do with any love for Saddam, but over a sense of double standards,'' he said. ''The Middle East peace process remains essential to any understanding with the Muslim and Arab world.''

Mr. Blair's support for Washington was a reiteration of the conviction he has held since taking office in 1997 -- that Britain owes its influence in the world to its partnership with the United States. While the posture may have gained him a hearing in Washington, it has burdened him in Europe with a reputation for being too subservient to America; at home, the prime minister is lampooned as Mr. Bush's ''poodle.''

In Paris today, President Jacques Chirac told French troops to stand by for possible service and said United Nations resolutions governing arms inspections in Iraq had to be enforced. But he coupled that with a warning to the United States over action that was precipitate or not internationally sanctioned. ''The international community should only resort to war as a last resort,'' he told diplomats. ''Reject resolutely the temptation of unilateral action.''

Mr. Hoon stressed that the announcement did not mean that war with Iraq was inevitable. On Monday, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said that the feeling within the government about the likelihood of war was ''60 to 40 against.''

Conservatives accused the government of playing down the deployment and disguising the extent of Britain's military commitment because of what Bernard Jenkin, the party's expert on defense matters, called ''divisions'' within Labor.

The announcement was expected to have been more sweeping. In recent weeks, there have been informed predictions of a call up of up to 7,000 reservists and a dispatch of the first of Britain's anticipated ground force of 20,000 troops.

Mr. Hoon heard directly from opponents in the House today. ''There is very little support and a great deal of hostility among our constituents to the possibility of sacrificing a single life of a soldier in the present circumstances,'' said Paul Flynn, a Labor member from Wales.

''Other countries in Europe are taking an independent line from that taken by the president of America,'' he said, accusing Britain of assuming the position of ''junior partner with the U.S. in this axis of delusion.''

Ministry of Defense officials said the British fleet in preparation in the Mediterranean for gulf duty included the aircraft carrier Ark Royal and the amphibious ship Ocean, three destroyers, four auxiliary vessels, three landing ships, two minesweepers and a submarine. Two commando units of the Marines will also be deployed, and more announcements like the one today are expected in the coming weeks, Mr. Hoon said.

In another sign of American preparations for possible war with Iraq, the first of more than 1,000 war planners at the United States Central Command headquarters in Tampa, Fla., have left for a command post in Qatar, a spokesman there said today.

Led by Lieut. Gen. John P. Abizaid, the senior staff moving to the gulf will have the command's headquarters in Qatar functioning by the end of January, American officials said. Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the commander of American forces in the gulf, will go there in February.

The meeting of 150 British ambassadors that Mr. Blair addressed was called to coordinate the country's missions with the new challenges presented by terror, the Foreign Office said.

Mr. Blair appeared adamant about pursuing peace in the Middle East. A spokesman for 10 Downing Street said that the prime minister wrote today to the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, urging him to reconsider Israel's decision to bar Palestinian negotiators from attending a meeting with the United States, the European Union, Russia and the United Nations in London on Jan. 14 to discuss reform of the Palestinian Authority. Israel took the action after two suicide bombings in Tel Aviv Sunday killed 22.

The spokesman said Mr. Blair's letter explained the context of the meeting as ''aimed specifically at the narrow but important issue'' or Palestinian reform.

The issue set off an undiplomatically sharp exchange yesterday between Mr. Straw, the foreign secretary, and his Israeli counterpart, Benjamin Netanyahu. According to a transcript released by the Israeli Embassy here, Mr. Netanyahu urged Britain to adopt the position of President Bush ''that leaders compromised by terror cannot be partners for peace.'' Mr. Netanyahu then charged, ''You in Britain are doing the exact opposite.''

Mr. Straw replied, ''No, it is Israel that is doing the opposite. Instead of concentrating on dealing with terrorism, it is striking at delegates.''

Mr. Blair's spokesman said the government was still preparing for the meeting. On Thursday, the prime minister is meeting with Amram Mitzna, the new leader of Israel's Labor party who advocates direct negotiations with the Palestinians.
