
Cairo Journal; Saddam's 'Weapons' Costly, 'Bush-Sharon' Cheap
By Neil MacFarquhar
Nov. 7, 2002

The dates nicknamed ''Saddam Hussein's Weapons of Mass Destruction'' were not selling so well today, the first day of Ramadan, at the wholesale market where thrifty Cairenes purchase their holiday treats.

It is something of a tradition for purveyors of the dates, hazelnuts, dried apricots and other delicacies used to break the daily fast at sundown to give pet names to their dozen or so date varieties.

''Yasir Arafat'' and the revived best seller from last year, ''Osama bin Laden,'' were already all but gone -- a reflection that the plight of the Palestinians and the fight against terrorism remain the preoccupations of the moment.

''The names attract the attention of the clients,'' said Khaled Hussein, shouting above the din in the market, situated underneath the ramps leading to one of the main bridges across the Nile. ''Even if they are sad, they stop and look and laugh.''

The ''Mass Destruction'' moniker went to a particularly long, somewhat costly date imported from Iraq.

''Look at them, they look just like Scud missiles,'' said another seller, Sayid Mahmoud, scooping one out of an overflowing burlap sack. ''Sales are just O.K. I think people are waiting to see what happens with America. I'm sure if he uses his missiles, sales will improve.''

Mostly, shoppers seemed to find the ''Mass Destruction'' dates too expensive. Sellers too, acknowledged that it was a bad year. With the Egyptian pound sinking against the dollar, prices for some imported goods were up 50 percent over last Ramadan.

''The holiday spirit of Ramadan is basically gone, especially among the young people with all their unemployment, their frustrations,'' said Ashraf Mustafa Amin, the 33-year-old owner of a factory for Pharaonic souvenirs. ''The problem is that every year the situation does not improve. In fact, every year it gets worse and worse.''

To relieve their doldrums, most Egyptians and, indeed, people across the Arab world look forward to the special programs that television stations roll out to take advantage of the mass audience gathering to eat. Ramadan marks the holiest month on the calendar, but over the generations the original spirit of religious reflection and good works has gradually been overshadowed by extended nightly meals.

Usually one program pulls out ahead of the pack, because of its stars or controversial nature. Last year the issue was polygamy, with a show that glorified a middle-class man who married the maximum four wives allowed under Islam.

This year the early lead seems to be going to ''Knight Without a Horse,'' a series that has already received worldwide attention, even though the first episode was not scheduled to be shown until late tonight.

The Bush administration encouraged Arab governments to ban the series because it incorporates ideas from the long discredited ''Protocols of the Elders of Zion,'' an anti-Semitic forgery by the czarist secret police that purported to lay out a plan by Jews to dominate the world.

With some 20 Arab stations set to broadcast ''Knight Without a Horse,'' the producers, script writers and actors held a news conference Monday to defend the program, saying it merely depicted the early Arab struggle against Zionism and foreign occupation.

Muhammad Sobhi, the screenwriter and a main actor, said he recognized that the protocols were a forgery, but said that in any event, it appeared to be the blueprint of Israeli plans to deny the Palestinians a state of their own.

There was a certain degree of gloating among the creators because of the attention, not least because so many Arab intellectuals say they are weary of being preached to about human rights and other values when Washington does nothing to stop Israel from using missiles against Palestinian homes.

''If this series scares the United States and the Zionist entity,'' Mr. Sobhi said, using the name for Israel favored by those who abhor its existence, ''then we will make many more like it.''

The Egyptian government spokesman, Nabil Osman, issued a three-page statement expressing surprise at the outcry.

''It is neither acceptable nor reasonable to selectively heap accusations of anti-Semitism on artists simply because they sympathize with the plight of the Palestinian people and thus are critical of Israeli policies and practices,'' the statement said, adding that banning the series would stifle artistic creativity.

Oddly enough, at the same time that the government was rising to its defense, Dream TV, the mostly privately owned satellite station that produced the 41 episodes, was being officially reprimanded for an earlier broadcast -- a talk show last month that discussed female masturbation. An oversight board barred the piece from being rebroadcast and admonished the station to treat delicate topics with greater sensitivity.

Of course, many in television circles believe that the real root of the warning lay elsewhere. Dream TV had also recently broadcast remarks by Muhammad Hassanein Heikal, a towering figure among Egyptian thinkers, in which he disparaged the idea that President Hosni Mubarak might be succeeded by his son Gamal. Mr. Heikal said it was unthinkable that Mr. Mubarak, 74, could seek a fifth term when his current one expires in 2005 and noted that the president himself had rejected the idea of a dynasty.

Both topics -- the matter of succession and Mr. Mubarak's son -- are off-limits in Egyptian media, and either is likely to send Mr. Mubarak into a rage.

Egyptians shopping for their holiday dates today waved away such questions, saying they were too burdened by economic troubles to worry about things like succession or outside criticism of what appeared on Egyptian television.

One sure sign of that was that lots of people were buying the absolute lowest quality of dates, nicknamed ''Bush and Sharon.''

''They are the worst; not sweet at all, very bitter,'' said one seller, Mr. Hussein. ''The others are all healthy, very sweet, from good palms. We expect people to buy these cheap ones either for charity or maybe to throw at each other.''

One shopper was buying two brimming bags of ''Bush and Sharon'' dates, about 22 pounds for about $5.

''At least they are so tough that I know they won't have any mites in them,'' he said, adding, ''It's the most I can afford.''
