
THREATS AND RESPONSES: POLITICS; Democrats Seek Compromise With White House on Iraq
By David Firestone
Oct. 1, 2002

Congressional Democrats scrambled today to win White House support for a resolution to narrow the conditions for an invasion of Iraq, hoping Republican concessions might allow skeptical Democrats to support the use of force and thus limit floor debate on an issue that seems to grow more contentious by the day.

But facing resistance from Republicans in Congress and in the White House, and with a growing number of Democrats planning to propose changes to the resolution, the Senate's Democratic leadership had to delay the debate until Wednesday.

The top two party leaders from each chamber plan to meet with President Bush at the White House on Wednesday to see if an agreement can be struck on language that would bring more skeptics about military action into the fold and enlarge the consensus for invasion.

Already, even a few moderate Republicans have begun to join liberal Democrats in questioning the scope of the president's proposal that Congress give him a free hand to choose a course of action. Today, Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, the ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, joined the panel's chairman, Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, in proposing an alternative resolution.

Instead of citing only the national security interests of the United States, as the White House resolution does, it would emphasize the defense needs of the United States and its allies.

It would also require the administration to notify Congress within 30 days of an invasion of the degree of assistance from other countries and the status of plans to rebuild Iraq, with further reports required every 60 days. The White House had agreed to report every 90 days.

Another Democrat, Dianne Feinstein of California, said today that she would introduce an amendment that would authorize force only if Iraq failed to comply within 30 days with United Nations resolutions requiring Baghdad to destroy weapons of mass destruction. It would also require the president to certify that the United States has exhausted other diplomatic avenues.

The changes and alternatives, along with those already proposed by Senator Carl Levin of Michigan and others, are not considered likely to pass if brought up on their own. Senate leaders estimate that there are probably 75 to 80 votes for the White House language, and the House is virtually certain to pass any resolution supported by President Bush when it votes next week. But any changes accepted by the White House are likely to reduce the number of dissenting votes and amendments during the debate, which all sides say they would like to limit in an effort to build a more united front.

''Our goal from the outset has been to construct a resolution that helps the president attract strong bipartisan support,'' Mr. Lugar and Mr. Biden said in a joint statement today.

Ms. Feinstein said Mr. Bush clearly ''has the votes'' to approve military action, but she added that she hoped to expand that majority by adding language that would take into account concerns about the administration's unilateralist tendencies.

''This vote, the most important one I will ever take as a senator, will color substantially the view of America in the rest of the world,'' she said. ''I'm one that has been very concerned about a pre-emptive unilateral attack in terms of America's perceived 'imperialist' culture that this administration has developed.''

At the moment, as many as a dozen Democratic senators have expressed strong reservations about President Bush's request for a free hand to take action in Iraq, telling Senate leaders that they cannot vote for the draft resolution proposed last week by the White House. Another dozen or so Democrats are considered skeptics, while the rest are likely to join Republicans in lining up behind the administration.

Although talks continued today among the staffs of the party leaders in each chamber toward reaching a compromise that would minimize the number of amendments, Republican officials said they were not inclined to go along with the Democratic proposals. John Feehery, a spokesman for Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, said the House leadership was very comfortable with last week's White House draft, which would require enforcement of United Nations resolutions on inspection and disarmament in Iraq without requiring international participation.

Even opening the Iraq debate could be difficult in a Senate riven by partisan and ideological divisions. Several Senate aides said they were concerned that Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, a Democratic critic of presidential authorization, might filibuster a motion to begin debate, although aides to Mr. Byrd said they did not know of his plans. Ending a filibuster would take two days.

Taking up the military resolution will also mean setting aside the issue that has absorbed the Senate for the better part of a month, creation of the Homeland Security Department. The domestic security legislation is being filibustered by Republicans who no longer have a Senate majority to remove job protections for workers placed in the department.

Talks between centrist senators and the White House on a compromise foundered today, and a spokeswoman for Tom Daschle, the majority leader, said he would probably have to set aside the domestic security bill to debate the Iraq resolution.

Once the Iraq debate begins, each senator would be granted up to an hour to speak on the subject, Senate officials said. Although not every senator is likely to speak, the debate will probably last at least a week, delaying a final vote until late next week. Each amendment introduced will also require debate and a vote.

Last week, a prominent liberal Democrat, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, warned the administration of the dangers of unilateral action in Iraq. Today, a moderate Republican senator, Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, in a speech to the Eisenhower Institute, expressed a similar concern.

''American power alone cannot carry the day in a project of this magnitude,'' Mr. Hagel said. ''We need our allies, we need our friends, we need our partners because we cannot afford to fail. It will 