

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AMMAN; Jordan Pressing U.S. to Offer Exile to Hussein And His Aides if They Yield Power in Iraq
By John F. Burns
Feb. 12, 2003

Officials at high levels of Jordan's government say they are pressing the United States to offer President Saddam Hussein and perhaps 50 of his top aides a guarantee of safe haven elsewhere in the Arab world if they will quit power in Iraq.

The idea of offering the Iraqi leadership exile is not new. It was floated last month by Saudi Arabian officials, and endorsed by senior figures in the Bush administration, including Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. But the proposal failed to gain momentum after it was contemptuously rejected by Iraqi officials, and implicitly by Mr. Hussein himself, in statements vowing to defeat an American invasion.

But top Jordanian officials say they are pushing for incorporation of the idea in any new resolution on Iraq by the United Nations Security Council -- not so much because they believe Mr. Hussein will accept it, but because they are almost certain he will not.

These officials, who declined to be further identified, said that by rejecting a formal offer of exile from the top body of the United Nations, Mr. Hussein would isolate himself from other senior Iraqi leaders, thus increasing the chances of a move to kill or overthrow him.

In part, the significance of Jordan's advocacy of exile for Mr. Hussein and other Iraqi officials is that a neighboring Arab state heavily dependent on economic ties to Baghdad and cheap Iraqi oil has effectively abandoned any moves to preserve the current Iraqi leaders in place.

At senior levels of the Amman government, officials say they regard an American attack on Iraq as unstoppable, and have moved beyond diplomatic maneuvering that might keep Mr. Hussein in power to a more ''pragmatic'' approach that seeks to accomplish Mr. Hussein's ouster without a war.

The Jordanians say they have discussed the idea with other Arab leaders, and found broad acceptance of the idea with Saudi Arabia, Egypt and others.

Saudi and Egyptian leaders have both met recently with Jordan's ruler, King Abdullah, who has been among the most active Arab leaders in seeking a consensus in reacting to the Iraqi crisis.

Outlining King Abdullah's proposal for an amnesty for Mr. Hussein and other top Iraqi leaders, one official here who has met Mr. Hussein said he was almost certain to choose a fate akin to Hitler's death in his bunker in 1945 Berlin if American forces arrive at in Baghdad.

Other top Iraqis, including both of Mr. Hussein's sons, Qusay and Uday, would be likely to choose personal survival over a cataclysmic end, these officials said.

''Uday might be the first to shoot his father if he refused an amnesty,'' one senior Jordan official said. He added that Jordan's estimate of the Iraqi leaders was that many in the top 50 who might be included in an amnesty offer, including high-ranking generals, might summon up the resolve to kill Mr. Hussein if he refused an amnesty that was the last lifeline available to them. In his 23 years in power, Mr. Hussein has survived numerous assassination attempts, mostly by disaffected generals, and has executed dozens of alleged plotters.

Senior Jordanian officials say they believe that a ''quick war,'' with limited casualties and damage to Iraq's infrastructure, might lead to an equally rapid reversal of popular opinion across the Arab world. Scenes of Iraqis hailing their liberation, these officials reason, could send a powerful message to Arabs outside Iraq who until now have supported Mr. Hussein.

In discussions with these Jordanian officials, there is barely any reference to the dispute between the United States and European nations over the best way of containing Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. These officials cite the American resolve to get rid of Mr. Hussein in saying the issue in Iraq is ''regime change,'' not weapons, and they make clear they favor the switch.

These officials say that most Arab leaders would be happy to see Mr. Hussein overthrown, despite the Iraqi leader's popularity with many ordinary Arabs.

The Jordanian officials speak in unvarnished terms -- similar to those used in the reports of Western human rights groups -- of the terror they say Mr. Hussein has imposed on Iraq's 24 million people.

The Jordanians also say they have told the Americans that the war with Iraq must be brief -- one top official specified a week, if possible -- and that American military commanders should do everything possible to limit civilian casualties.

In contrast to senior officials in Washington who testified to Congress today that American-controlled governance of Iraq might last more than two years, the Jordanian officials said they have urged the Americans to make plans for governing Iraq, ideally, for no more than three months.

After that, they have told American officials, ultimate authority in Iraq should shift to a civilian authority appointed by a coalition of foreign states, but not necessarily one under United Nations leadership. This civilian leadership would work with American military commanders, the Jordanians say.

One account given at authoritative levels here is that King Abdullah decided to prepare for an American attack on Iraq last July, after a meeting at the White House with President Bush.

A Jordanian official familiar with that meeting said the 41-year-old king had asked Mr. Bush if there was any point in trying to persuade the American leader to abandon plans to topple Mr. Hussein. Mr. Bush, this official said, told King Abdullah that his mind was made up, prompting the king to shift his priorities to making preparations to cushion Jordan against the impact of a war.

This approach contrasts starkly with that of King Abdullah's father, King Hussein, who died of cancer in 1999 after 46 years on the throne. The last few years of that reign were spent struggling with the consequences of the Persian Gulf war, which were difficult for Jordan.

In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, King Hussein sought to act as an intermediary, maintaining ties with the Iraqi leader and searching for Arab solutions to the Kuwait crisis in ways that infuriated the first President Bush. Ties with the United States went into the deep freeze for several years afterwards.
