

STATE OF THE UNION: THE CONTINENT; Britain Accuses Baghdad, Deepening Rift in Europe
By Alan Cowell
Jan. 29, 2003

Fissures within Europe seemed to widen today as Britain openly accused Iraq of being in ''material breach'' of the disarmament conditions laid down by the United Nations, echoing Washington's language to justify war against the government of Saddam Hussein.

It was the first time in the current phase of the crisis that Britain had publicly used the phrase, diplomatic code for a casus belli. While its use seemed to reflect a desire to increase pressure on Baghdad, Britain's heightened bellicosity illuminated its differences with many of its European partners who are either less prepared for -- or opposed to -- an invasion of Iraq.

In Paris, French officials reiterated their government's opposition to a military campaign without specific authorization by the United Nations. At the same time, foreign ministers of the European Union finished up two days of discussions in Brussels unable to patch over their lingering differences on Iraq. Today, none of the ministers from the major European Union countries, including four representing Security Council members -- Britain France, Germany and Spain -- were present.

The warning of a ''material breach,'' by Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, came at a critical juncture -- one day after Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector for biological and chemical weapons, raised doubts over Iraq's compliance with United Nations demands and just hours before President Bush used his State of the Union address to set out the arguments for a military campaign.

At the same time, Prime Minister Tony Blair -- America's staunchest European ally, who has committed 30,000 British troops in support of United States soldiers massing in the gulf region -- is set to lobby European nations intensively before and after meeting with President Bush at Camp David on Friday.

Mr. Straw again said war was ''not inevitable,'' but at a news conference he said Baghdad ''does not have long to change its behavior fundamentally. We cannot let Saddam Hussein and the Iraq regime get away with never-ending deceit and delay.''

Mr. Straw said the onus now lay on Baghdad to present ''credible evidence'' that it had destroyed weapons of mass destruction and was prepared to cooperate actively with the United Nations.

''What Iraq has to understand is that time is running out and if it does not comply with the requirements of the international community, which are now shown to be fully justified, then serious consequences will follow,'' Mr. Straw said. ''Serious consequences means the use of force.'' The British official spoke after Secretary of State Colin L. Powell issued similar warnings.

On Monday, Mr. Blix listed a catalog of questions about the whereabouts in Iraq of a variety of weapons of mass destruction Baghdad was supposed to have destroyed after the Persian Gulf war.

Mr. Blair is to meet with the Spanish prime minister, José María Aznar, on Thursday on his way to Camp David. He is scheduled to meet with the French president, Jacques Chirac, next Tuesday for what could be a critical encounter. Along with Germany, France has led European skepticism about war with Iraq. As a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, France could use its veto power to block a resolution authorizing an invasion.

In Paris, Mr. Chirac discussed Iraq with the Saudi foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal. Mr. Chirac's spokeswoman, Catherine Colonna, said they agreed that the inspectors should continue their work in Iraq, but emphasized that Iraq had to cooperate. Ms. Colonna, briefing reporters, said they agreed that ''all solutions other than the use of force, which can only be justified as a last resort, must be explored.''

After the meeting, the Saudi official said he and Mr. Chirac had also discussed ''what needs to be done to prevent a calamity and a crisis of immense proportions inside Iraq.'' Suggesting that Saudi Arabia harbored concern about the shape of Iraq after a war, he said that, ''in my government, we are all hoping for a possibility of a solution that avoids the dismemberment and maintains the territorial integrity of Iraq.'' He did not elaborate.

Dominique de Villepin, the French foreign minister, repeated France's opposition to military action without Security Council approval, saying if Washington went ahead without it, ''we could not associate ourselves with such an action.''

In London, Mr. Straw said Mr. Blix's report might have lessened European resistance to a military campaign. ''There is a great degree of sobriety now about the seriousness of the situation and a better understanding of the case the U.S. and we have been making about the Iraqi regime and its noncompliance.''

As elsewhere in Europe, the British government has been struggling to overcome a sense among many people that an attack on Iraq would only create greater perils of terrorist retribution, and Mr. Straw took pains to rebut that view. ''The world would be a much, much more dangerous place,'' he said, ''if, at this stage, we were to allow the world's most aggressive rogue state to continue with its practices of concealment and deceit and, above all, the development and holding of poisons, diseases and other weapons of mass destruction.''

In a radio interview, Mr. Straw said the chances of a peaceful outcome ''are less than they were.''

The differences in European opinion were reflected in remarks at the meeting in Brussels by the Greek foreign minister, George Papandreou, whose country holds the rotating European presidency.

On Monday, Mr. Papandreou had suggested that he might consider traveling to Iraq, though such a move appeared unlikely to gain the full approval of his colleagues. Reflecting Greek, if not universal European, opposition to war, he said the goal had to remain ''disarmament through inspections.''

If Mr. Papandreou is unlikely to travel to Baghdad, 35 legislators from the European Parliament said today that they would visit Iraq next week to observe firsthand the work of the inspectors and assess the need for aid. The legislators, from 11 different countries and four different political parties, said they would avoid meeting with government officials so as not to give the impression that they endorsed the government.
