

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MONITORING; U.N. Inspectors Criticize Iraqis Over Arms List
By Julia Preston
Jan. 10, 2003

The chief United Nations weapons inspectors sharply criticized Iraq today for failing to come forward with new information to clarify its weapons programs, but said they had ''not found any smoking gun'' indicating that Baghdad was concealing illegal weapons.

American officials seized on the inspectors' report as new proof that Iraq is not cooperating with the inspections as required by Security Council resolutions. American diplomats suggested that if Iraq did not change by the end of the month they would step up the pressure at the United Nations for military action to disarm the country.

The inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, made their statements to the Security Council in a closed briefing. In the session, Mr. Blix said in blunt terms that a declaration Iraq presented in December on its weapons programs was ''rich in volume but poor in new information,'' adding that Baghdad had given an ''inadequate response'' to the inspectors' demand for a complete list of Iraqi weapons experts.

''We have not so far made progress'' toward confirming that Iraq is clean of weapons of mass destruction, Mr. Blix said, according to the text of his statement released after the meeting.

John D. Negroponte, the American ambassador to the United Nations, said, ''There is still no evidence that Iraq has changed its approach from one of deceit to a genuine attempt to be forthcoming.''

Dr. ElBaradei, the United Nations chief nuclear inspector and the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said his inspection team had determined that aluminum tubes Baghdad tried to import over the last two years were intended to build rockets and not centrifuges to enrich uranium.The I.A.E.A. will, however, continue to look into the issue of the tubes.

The Bush administration had cited the tubes as a central piece of evidence for its claim that President Saddam Hussein was trying to restart his nuclear arms program. The nuclear agency challenged President Bush's assessment, although it noted that buying the tubes to make rockets would violate a 1991 Security Council resolution on importing military equipment.

The inspections chiefs cast serious doubt on Iraq's cooperation so far. Although Baghdad has allowed inspection teams to work unhindered, they said the inspections were not effective because Iraq has not produced information for them to verify, showing that prohibited weapons from the past have been destroyed.

Most of the 15 Council nations expressed concern about the inspectors' report, according to diplomats who attended the meeting. Only Russia, a permanent Council power, and Syria, the only Arab nation, refrained from echoing the inspectors' negative account.

Differences between the United States and other Council nations came clearly into view, however, over the timing of the next steps in the inspections. Washington is talking about the end of January as a time for reaching conclusions about Iraq's compliance with Security Council resolutions. Other nations, as well as the inspectors, are calling for more time before making decisive assessments.

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei will travel to Baghdad for meetings on Jan. 19 and 20. On Jan. 27, they return to the Council to give an in-depth evaluation of their work. They have said that report will be far more thorough than the one today, which was an interim briefing they gave after the United States insisted on hearing more frequent reports from them.

The Jan. 27 meeting will be a special open session in which countries not currently on the Security Council can participate, diplomats said today. Two days later the Council will convene in a closed meeting to consider the inspectors' report.

Mr. Negroponte said that if Iraq did not come forward with better information by Jan. 27, it would be an ''extremely serious matter.'' The United States will sharply increase its pressure on the Council to move toward a final conclusion on Iraq's cooperation, a Bush administration official said.

''Our understanding was that it would take 60 days for the Council to decide whether Iraq was cooperating,'' a Bush official said. ''We're not going to let the Council slip in making those decisions.''

Mr. Negroponte said Iraq's performance ''does not constitute active cooperation.''

Rather than showing that Mr. Hussein has been hiding secret weapons, American diplomats seemed to be building a case that Baghdad has consistently failed to cooperate fully with the inspections. Under Resolution 1441, a pattern of noncooperation by Iraq is a grave breach that can lead to war.

But other diplomats played down the importance of the Jan. 27 report. The British ambassador, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, urged everyone to ''calm down'' about Jan. 27.

''The inspectors need time to do their business,'' he said. He noted the inspectors had assured the Council that they would report immediately if any secret weapons were found.

The Russian ambassador to the United Nations, Sergey Lavrov, insisted that the inspections were ''in the early stages.''

Concerning the issue of interviewing Iraqi weapons experts, Mr. Blix said the list of scientists provided by Baghdad did not even include all the names provided by United Nations inspectors who were in Iraq before the previous inspections were suspended in 1998.

''We do not feel the Iraqi side has made a serious effort to respond to the request we made,'' he said.

Mr. Blix, who leads the biological and chemical weapons team, cited ''a significant discrepancy'' in the Iraqi weapons declaration concerning the numbers of chemical munitions remaining in Iraq's arsenal. He also reported that Iraq had recently imported ''a relatively large number'' of missile engines whose purpose was not clarified by the Iraqi declaration. It also contained contradictory information about supplies of the chemical warfare agent known as VX, he said.

Dr. ElBaradei said Iraq had removed special seals on supplies of a high explosive called HMX and moved them around, but the arms declaration did not explain what happened to this matériel.

He also said his team was investigating reports that Iraq tried to import uranium after 1991. He said that there was still ''a significant amount of work to do'' to clarify the status of Iraq's nuclear program.
