

Iraqi Opposition Gets U.S. Pledge To Oust Hussein for a Democracy
By Michael R. Gordon
Aug. 11, 2002

Vice President Dick Cheney told Iraqi opposition leaders today that the Bush administration was determined to oust Saddam Hussein from power and replace him with a democratic government, Iraqi resistance leaders said today.

In their second day of high-level talks in Washington, the opposition leaders conferred by video conference with Mr. Cheney, who is on vacation in Wyoming. They also met at the White House today with Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Participants in the meeting said afterward that the discussions had dealt with the military situation in Iraq as well as the general principles that would determine how Iraq is governed if Mr. Hussein was deposed, specifically the need to preserve the territorial integrity of Iraq and ensure that a new government respects democratic principles.

While Mr. Cheney and Mr. Rumsfeld's statement that the United States wants a democratic government in Iraq may not appear surprising, it has important implications. It indicates that Washington would not accept an outcome in which Mr. Hussein was toppled in a coup and replaced by another authoritarian figure, even one more amenable to American interests. It suggests that Washington is committed to bring about sweeping changes in Iraq and depose not just Mr. Hussein but the entire ruling structure.

While the administration has discussed the desirability of a democratic Iraq, the pledge to the opposition comes at a particularly important juncture as the United States faces questions internationally and in Congress about its ultimate aims if Mr. Hussein is overthrown.

It is also significant because discussions between the White House and the Iraqi opposition about the future of Iraq have now begun in earnest.

''The main message was that the U.S. is seriously committed to regime change in Iraqi,'' Sharif Ali bin al-Hussein, one of the opposition leaders, said, referring to the discussions with Mr. Cheney and Mr. Rumsfeld.

''There is no decision on how and when, but the U.S. did stress it wants to maintain the territorial integrity and unity of Iraq and the establishment of the democratic rule of law,'' he added. ''They support a democratic regime in Iraq. They would not support replacing one dictator with another.''

Such a transformation could pay huge strategic dividends for American foreign policy, but it would also require a substantial effort to rebuild Iraq, including the development of new governing institutions.

Mr. Rumsfeld alluded to this vision of a new Iraq on Friday when he told reporters that the United States wanted to see an Iraq that did not develop weapons of mass destruction or threaten its neighbors, and which respected the rule of law and gave its citizens a voice in running the country. Such changes should be sought, he said, despite the criticism that the United States has made a half-hearted effort to build new institutions in Afghanistan after toppling the Taliban.

''Wouldn't it be a wonderful thing if Iraq were similar to Afghanistan, if a bad regime was thrown out, people were liberated, food could come in, borders could be opened, repression could stop, prisons could be opened?'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''I mean, it would be fabulous.''

President Bush was more circumspect in his comments on Iraq today. He said he had ''no imminent war plan'' or timetable for confronting Iraq. But he added that Iraq was ''an enemy until proven otherwise'' because of its programs to develop chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and the missiles that might carry them.

In the Bush administration's discussions with the Iraqi opposition on Friday and today, an American military intervention seemed to be a foregone conclusion. The main goal seemed to be to lay the political groundwork for an eventual American military campaign by encouraging Iraqi opposition figures to put aside their past feuds and work together.

With encouragement from Washington, the opposition leaders also sought to show that they are an inclusive group that welcomes support from military officers and officials inside Iraq. That is important since the White House believes that the opposition groups currently have little military ability, and Washington is clearly hoping that Iraqi military units nominally loyal to Mr. Hussein join a campaign against him.

''We want to expand beyond our group of six,'' Sharif Ali said in an interview. ''There are other elements that need to be brought in.''

Earlier in the month, Congress held two days of hearings to discuss the administration's policy in Iraq. While many members of Congress generally support American military action, some have pointedly asked what the administration's long-range plans are for Iraq and have questioned whether the administration is truly prepared to stabilize the country and help rebuild Iraqi institutions after such an intervention.

Last week the House majority leader, Dick Armey, said the United States would not be justified in atacking Iraq without a provocation.

One of the administration's aims in the meetings today was to make the case that a significant segment of Iraqi society welcomes American military action to create a new, democratic Iraqi.

The Iraqi opposition leaders include representatives from the two main Kurdish factions, an Iranian-backed Shiite group, a monarchist group, a group that includes former Iraqi military officers and the Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella organization. In Iraq, the government-controlled news media denounced the opposition figures as a ''delinquent clique,'' portraying them in essence as a band of outsiders determined to seize power for themselves.

Mr. Cheney and Mr. Rumsfeld have taken the most hard-line stance on Iraq in the administration and clearly gave the Iraqi opposition leaders a sympathetic hearing. In his video-conference appearance, Mr. Cheney told the Iraqi opposition leaders that the administration supported their efforts and was determined to replace the Hussein regime.

Then the opposition figures met with Mr. Rumsfeld and General Myers. Mr. Rumsfeld, they said, was particularly emphatic in his 40-minute meeting with them today.

''The secretary of defense made it quite clear that they were committed to regime change in Iraq, that they were going all the way,'' Sharif Ali said.
