

Cameo Appearance by Iraq in a New Mexico Race
By Adam Clymer
Oct. 9, 2002

Steve Pearce, a decorated Air Force veteran who says his Democratic opponent is weak on Iraq, is a rarity in the national battle for the House, which seems focused on domestic issues.

When State Senator John Arthur Smith, Mr. Pearce's Democratic opponent in New Mexico's Second District -- one of the tossup races expected to determine control of the House -- said last month that President Bush should obtain Congressional backing and seek international backing before taking military action, Mr. Pearce attacked him.

''Smith's indecisiveness demonstrates he does not intend to preserve our national interest,'' Mr. Pearce said.

Mr. Pearce, who served two terms in the New Mexico House, no longer dwells on Iraq, but he brings up his military background frequently. He beamed recently when Hector Barreto, head of the Small Business Administration, told a reception here that Mr. Pearce, a Republican, could help the president because he understands the Defense Department and ''how much we've let our armed forces deteriorate.''

Mr. Smith says the issue is dead. ''I objected when the president was going to move unilaterally,'' he said. ''I support the president now once he gets support from Congress and from our allies, as much as we can.''

Mr. Smith also criticized two fellow Democrats, Representatives David E. Bonior of Michigan and Jim McDermott of Washington, for traveling to Iraq.

''I think it's destructive,'' Mr. Smith said. ''We need to be speaking with one voice.''

Much of the time these two candidates for the House do speak with one voice as they try to win the seat Representative Joe Skeen has held for the Republicans for 22 years. Mr. Skeen never had a tough race, but now that he is retiring and the seat is open, Democrats have high hopes of taking it back.

About the only domestic subject on which Mr. Pearce and Mr. Smith clearly differ is taxes. Mr. Pearce, an entrepreneur in the oil-field service industry from Hobbs, wants more tax cuts, including an end to taxes on estates and capital gains. Mr. Smith, an appraiser from Deming, said the deficit and the costs of a likely war against Iraq meant ''we're probably going to have to delay some of those tax cuts'' enacted last year.

But more of the time they emphasize the same issues, like their commitment to the Second Amendment and New Mexico's gun owners and the importance of water supplies to this vast, dry district -- roughly the southern half of the state -- that is as big as New York, New Jersey and Connecticut combined.

The race seems to be about even. Local polls have yet to show either candidate with a lead outside of the surveys' margin of sampling error.

The decisive factor is not likely to be foreign issues, or local concerns like Medicare reimbursement rates -- New Mexico gets less money for procedures than do most states -- or even the fact that New Mexico has a greater percentage of people without health insurance than any other state. Against a national average of 14.7 percent, New Mexico has 23.2 percent without insurance.

Instead the election is likely to turn on Hispanic turnout. Voters of Mexican ancestry make up more than half the electorate in this district, but they have traditionally cast only a third of the vote. That may change this year, said Jose Z. Garcia, an associate professor of government at New Mexico State University.

Professor Garcia said the enthusiasm stirred by Bill Richardson, the Democratic candidate for governor who is giving Hispanics a chance to elect one of their own to that office, will lift turnout and should give Mr. Smith a boost. Polls indicate that Mr. Pearce gets more Anglo voters, while Mr. Smith gets an even greater majority of Hispanics.

This district is critical to each party's hopes for controlling Congress, but that issue is rarely raised, although Mr. Pearce sometimes portrays his opponent as a liberal because he would vote for Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri to be speaker.

Though Mr. Smith has had plenty of help from the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, he has not brought Mr. Gephardt, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the party whip, or many Democrats with national visibility in to campaign for him. Mr. Pearce, in contrast, has had the campaign help not only of Mr. Barreto of the Small Business Administration, but also President Bush and most Republican Congressional leaders.

Mr. Pearce calls himself a visionary, seeing the need for radical solutions. Mr. Smith describes himself as an experienced lawmaker who can make alliances and get things done. Mr. Pearce says Mr. Smith voted for tax increases while in the Legislature. Mr. Smith says Mr. Pearce always voted to pass the state budget -- and any good things that were in it, like Medicaid reimbursement.

With 14 years in the state Senate, Mr. Smith seems more comfortable in political settings, though each man can shake hands through a crowd with the best of them.

Mr. Pearce says that in these ''perilous times,'' his status as a veteran gives him an edge in a state with the White Sands Missile Range, Holloman Air Force Base and the Bataan Highway, named for the New Mexicans who died in great numbers in the World War II death march in the Philippines.
Correction: Oct. 10, 2002
An article yesterday about the Congressional election in New Mexico's Second District misstated criticism made by the Democratic candidate, John Arthur Smith, against his opponent, Steve Pearce. Mr. Smith said that as a state legislator, Mr. Pearce always voted against the state budget, not for it.

Correction: Oct. 16, 2002
An article last Wednesday about the Congressional election in New Mexico's Second District referred incompletely to the presence of Hispanic candidates in the campaign for governor, which could influence the Congressional voting by increasing Hispanic turnout. The Democratic candidate for governor, Bill Richardson, is not the only Hispanic in the race; the Republican candidate, John Sanchez, is another.
