

A NATION AT WAR: SOUTHERN FRONT; As Many Iraqis Give Up, Some Fiercely Resist
By Dexter Filkins
March 23, 2003

The confused scene today on the outskirts of Basra, the largest city in southern Iraq, typified the allied campaign so far: general retreat by the Iraqis with groups of fierce holdouts, suggesting that the American and British advance, for all its initial successes, will face determined combat later on.

On the one hand, there was surrender. Indeed, across the southern desert today, so many Iraqi soldiers gave up so quickly that American marines hardly knew what to do with them.

The surrender on Friday of the Iraqi Army's 51st Mechanized Division, coupled with similar capitulations across the plains today, combined to form the sort of problem that a general might dream about: what to do with all these fighters who are throwing down their guns?

So today the marines improvised: Iraqi prisoners bounced on the backs of enormous military cargo trucks. They sat cross-legged in makeshift barbed-wire jails. They stood in single-file rows in the middle of the six-lane Baghdad Highway.

But on the other hand, even with the hundreds of Iraqi soldiers who surrendered today, there were still large groups who chose to stand and fight.

One of those groups gathered today around the town of Zubayr, which stands at the western approach to Basra. There, a group of Iraqi tank commanders apparently decided to defy the orders of their senior officers, who on Friday agreed to lay down their arms.

The holdouts had about 20 tanks in all, and by midmorning they were engaged in a furious battle with a platoon of American tanks nearly twice that size.

It quickly became apparent that it was a mismatch. With the Iraqis manning Soviet-era tanks, their American counterparts radioed for support from AH-1 Super Cobra gunships and British self-propelled howitzers.

Within an hour, more than a dozen trucks bearing hundreds of rounds of tank ammunition rumbled to the scene of the fight.

''We're hoping the resistance crumbles like a rotten apple,'' said Capt. Andrew Bergen, standing at a checkpoint on the road leading into Zubayr.

The scattered fighting unfolded today as American and British forces moved to the city limits of Basra, Iraq's second-largest city.

American commanders said their forces were not likely to enter Basra, where they might face street fighting, unless the Iraqi security forces and other loyalists of Saddam Hussein tried to strike first.

Near Basra, Iraqis kept surrendering. ''They are just showing up, hands in the air,'' said Maj. Patrick Cox, a Marine tank commander at a sprawling staging area in the desert. ''I think we've taken 400 prisoners since we got here.''

When Major Cox's tank battalion swept in from Kuwait on Friday morning, he came upon a large group of Iraqi soldiers who had decided to surrender even before he arrived.

''They were waiting for us when we got here'' Major Cox said.

As in the Persian Gulf war in 1991, most of the Iraqis who gave up were the conscripts of the regular military units, not members of the Republican Guard divisions.

With most Republican Guard units gathered around Baghdad, the American and British forces have rolled through the south, which has long been regarded as hostile to Mr. Hussein.

Many of the Iraqi Army recruits were drawn from the south, and many were adherents of the Shiite branch of Islam, which Mr. Hussein's security forces have persecuted.

The scene near the village of Shu Aiba seemed to illustrate the plight of the Iraqi soldiers who had chosen to give up. When a platoon of marines drove up the Baghdad Highway this morning, they found three Iraqi soldiers waiting to surrender. The men had been living under a bridge, surviving on a diet of tomatoes.

By midmorning, the three Iraqi soldiers were sitting on blankets and picking from the bright yellow food packets provided by the Americans. They seemed ashamed to be prisoners, but made clear that a greater dread was life in the Iraqi Army.

''We are not cowards, but what is the point?'' said Ahmed Ghobashi, an Iraqi colonel from Baghdad. ''I've got a rifle from World War II. What can I do against American airplanes?''

Colonel Ghobashi talked on for a while, detailing his participation in the disastrous wars begun by Mr. Hussein in Iran and Kuwait. He was a professional soldier, he said, and he did not sign up to engage in fanciful adventures. As he talked on, his tone grew bitter, until he concluded that Mr. Hussein must have a secret agenda.

''He doesn't give us enough to eat, and he doesn't pay us,'' the colonel said. ''And then he starts this thing with the Americans and then tells us to defend the country against the invasion.''

Colonel Ghobashi pursed his lips in contemplation and rendered his final opinion on Mr. Hussein.

''I believe he is an American agent,'' he said.

The American soldiers fanning out across the region said they were ready for the Iraqi prisoners, but there were signs that there might be unexpected complications.

As a column of tanks moved toward the northwest, the marines took into custody a group of Iraqi soldiers who were willing to surrender, but also, apparently, a group of farmers caught up in the confusion.

Under an afternoon sky, the 11 farmers sat on the blacktop of the Baghdad Highway. The marines had rounded them up with others taken in the area, and without an Arabic interpreter present, they were not able to ask them any questions.

Instead, they handed them packs of American rations to snack on while they sorted out their fate.

When an Arabic speaker did arrive, it became clear that the 11 were not soldiers at all, but tomato farmers who lived in a nearby village. The young marines in charge tried to assure the Iraqis that they had no desire to hold them.

''We'll sort everything out,'' First Sgt. Lew Ducett told the men. ''Just have some lunch first.''

Ali Kathem, one of the farmers, threw down his ration packet in frustration. ''I don't want to eat lunch,'' Mr. Kathem said. ''I want to go to my farm.''
