

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BLUNT DIPLOMACY; Powell Attacks Validity of the Work by Weapons Inspectors in Iraq
By Steven R. Weisman With Felicity Barringer
March 6, 2003

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, in an unusual clash with the United Nations weapons inspectors, directly attacked the validity of their work in Iraq today, even as one of the chief inspectors declared that his team had forced ''real disarmament'' on Saddam Hussein.

Speaking at a forum in Washington, Mr. Powell released what he said was new intelligence information demonstrating that some of the very successes cited by Hans Blix, the chief inspector for chemical and biological weapons, and others at United Nations, were actually not what they seemed.

The conflicting statements suggested that diplomacy was moving toward a showdown -- first on Friday, when Mr. Blix is to make his next report to the United Nations, and then next week, when American officials say they are inclined to seek a vote on a resolution to authorize the use of force against Iraq.

Mr. Powell said that while the inspectors were busy overseeing the destruction of rockets in one part of Iraq, American intelligence had found that Iraq had begun to hide machinery to ''convert other kinds of engines'' to power the same rockets.

In addition, on the same day that Mr. Blix said that the United Nations had carried out seven interviews with Iraqi scientists ''on our terms precisely'' -- that is, without minders or eavesdropping -- Mr. Powell suggested that Iraq had bugged the premises or put clandestine bugs on the scientists themselves.

''The inspectors are very, very dedicated professionals,'' Mr. Powell said. ''These are terrific people.'' He said that what he called the failure of the inspections was not ''any fault of theirs.''

But the secretary made clear his view that the inspections process had been a diversion from the real issue -- whether Mr. Hussein was cooperating with the inspectors and revealing all of his weapons programs.

''Has Saddam Hussein made a strategic, political decision to comply with the United Nations Security Council resolutions?'' Mr. Powell asked, in tones of what seemed to be exasperation. ''That's the question. There is no other question. Everything else is secondary or tertiary. That's the issue.''

The conflicting statements were dramatic evidence of the mounting tensions over the increasingly determined effort by the United States to press the issue of war on a reluctant United Nations. It came as Russia, France and Germany again said -- more explicitly than ever before -- that they would not allow adoption of a Security Council resolution to authorize such a war.

This evening administration officials said that despite those tough words, they had not given up hope of getting acquiescence, if not approval, from France and Russia for a United Nations resolution. A nine-vote majority, even with vetoes by France or Russia, American officials believe, might still carry some moral authority in a trembling world.

Mr. Powell spoke today at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington policy institute, and Mr. Blix spoke to reporters at the United Nations. Their comments seemed directed at each other, though aides said that was not intentional.

Nevertheless, the divergent views illustrated the enormous barriers faced by the United States in making the argument that the inspections have run their course and the time had arrived to decide to go to war. The exchange also showed how early American hopes that Mr. Blix would help make the case for force against Iraq had proved false.

The statements by Mr. Blix and Mr. Powell set up a possible showdown on Friday, when Mr. Blix is scheduled to make an oral report to the Security Council. There he will face questions from Mr. Powell and his counterparts.

Mr. Powell's speech was aimed at presenting the best case that Iraq's concessions on inspections were not the same as compliance.

''Destroying a handful of missiles here under duress and only after you've pressed and pressed and pressed, and you can't avoid it,'' he said, was ''not the kind of compliance that was intended'' by the United Nations.

The secretary also expressed frustration with the comments of allies, who he said were forgetting what Iraq had been asked to do. He spoke of their attitude as: ''Let's just let bygones be bygones. Let's see what we can get him to do today that might make us feel a little better.''

''It's not going to work,'' Mr. Powell declared. ''We cannot ignore it.''

But at the United Nations, Mr. Blix's words were widely taken as evidence that delay was called for.

Mr. Blix even suggested that if an American-led war pre-empted the inspections in Iraq, it would ''cast some shadow'' on the viability of inspection as a tool in other spheres.

He mentioned no specifics. But in places such as North Korea and Iran, the Bush administration continues to support inspections as a way of preventing the spread of nuclear arms.

Mr. Blix also reiterated that he ''would welcome more time'' to verify Iraqi disarmament, again directly contradicting the Bush administration's point of view. ''If we were to be given four months, I would welcome it,'' he added, explicitly supporting the position of France, Germany and Russia.

But in a gesture to the American position, Mr. Blix said the effectiveness of continuing inspection did depend on Iraqi cooperation.

To date, Mr. Blix's spokesman said, Iraq has destroyed 28 missiles, a quarter of what inspectors believe is the total inventory.

In another sign of the poisoning of relations between the inspectors and the United States, Mr. Blix directly contradicted the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, who said on Monday that Mr. Hussein had earlier denied he had ''these weapons,'' meaning the missiles. Mr. Blix said the missiles ''were declared'' and that ''they were not clandestine.''

He was referring to Iraq's original arms declaration in December.

Mr. Blix did say that the Iraqis' track record ''has not been good'' even though ''they have been very active, I would say, and even pro-active, in the last month or so.''

Mr. Powell painted an entirely different picture, saying ''nobody should be quick to declare victory or compliance in the missile department.''
