

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS; Expanded U.N. Teams Pick Up Pace of Site Visits but Lack Details From Iraq
By John F. Burns
Dec. 10, 2002

United Nations weapons inspectors picked up the pace today, sending the largest team of nuclear experts yet for a third inspection of Al Tuweitha, the giant nuclear complex south of Baghdad and the centerpiece of Iraq's atomic-bomb project until it was itself bombed by American aircraft in 1991 during the Persian Gulf war.

The inspectors also examined two related nuclear sites and a sprawling military-industrial plant near Al Fallujah, 55 miles northwest of Baghdad, where they searched two chemical plants that played a part in Iraq's chemical weapons program in the 1980's and 90's, producing phenol and chlorine. Like Al Tuweitha, the so-called Fallujah II site was placed under monitoring during the previous inspections, from 1991 to 1998.

The current round began on Nov. 27 and ran into immediate criticism from the Bush administration, which said the effort was undermanned. Today, spokesmen for the inspection teams in Baghdad were keen to emphasize that more inspectors had been sent out than on any previous day, with five teams scouring Al Tuweitha alone.

The growing momentum was aided by the arrival of 25 inspectors on Sunday to join the 17 in the initial party. The experts are divided into two groups. One works for the main weapons-inspection agency, known as Unmovic, in searching biological, chemical and missile sites. The second consists of experts from the International Atomic Energy Agency and is responsible for nuclear sites.

There are now 25 weapons inspectors and 17 nuclear inspectors here, with a checklist of more than 900 sites to cover.

By Christmas, the number of inspectors is to rise to about 100, and beyond that, early next year, to a maximum of 300.

On arrival here, officials leading the inspection teams said they thought the work could take up to a year. That view was affirmed today by Mohamed ElBaradei, director general of the atomic energy agency, who said on a visit to Tokyo that it could take a year to conclude whether Iraq still had any elements of a nuclear weapons program.

Leaders of inspection teams have said that if the United States wants quicker results, it should provide the teams with more intelligence information.

Until then, the teams are likely to spend much of their time going over old sites long since rendered useless by the destruction ordered by previous inspectors, by American and British bombing in 1991 and 1998, or by the Iraqis themselves. From their experience in the 1990's, the inspectors know that once a site goes onto an inspection list, it is often abandoned, with the work shifted elsewhere, usually under the name of a different ministry or a state-run company.

For the moment, the inspectors are working without the new blueprint provided by the 12,000-page declaration on its weapons projects that Iraq delivered on Saturday to the United Nations and the atomic energy agency. In that document Iraq repeated earlier claims that it has no banned weapons materials or programs of any kind.

Work began today on reviewing the declaration in New York and Vienna, the headquarters of the atomic energy agency. A spokesman for the inspectors in Iraq, Hiro Ueki, said there were only three copies -- one for the Security Council, one for the weapons inspection agency in New York and one for the atomic energy agency -- and that no copy was available for the inspectors in Baghdad. ''Don't hope for leaks from here,'' Mr. Ueki said.

Some American officials appear to have concluded that a disaffected Iraqi scientist or engineer or a defector constitutes the most likely breakthrough in proving that Iraq has lied in claiming that it has no banned weapons or projects.

The precedent commonly cited is Gen. Hussein Kamel, a minister of military industrialization and a son-in-law of President Saddam Hussein. General Kamel defected to Jordan in 1995 and told C.I.A. officials about a vast range of secret weapons programs. He was later lured back to Iraq and killed.

The pervasiveness of security controls in Iraq and the close watch kept on weapons experts and the officials who supervise them make defections extremely difficult, especially because of the risks of retaliation against relatives left behind. The new United Nations mandate attempts to overcome this by providing the inspectors with the authority to take scientists out of Iraq for questioning, with their families.

Gen. Amir al-Saadi, a senior adviser to Mr. Hussein, said on Sunday that it would be ''up the individuals themselves'' to decide whether they would agree to leave Iraq for questioning, but he declined to say whether he would go himself.

In practice, few inspectors seem to believe that taking Iraqi scientists abroad is practicable. Any scientist inclined to go would have to leave with his extended family before his intentions became known to Iraqi security police, something that is highly unlikely in the authoritarian context of Mr. Hussein's Iraq. Another problem is that Iraq could plant agents who would provide inspectors with false information.

At Al Tuweitha today, another Iraqi scientist, Dr. Fayed al-Biraqdar, a senior nuclear official who has accompanied the inspectors on two tours of the complex in the past week, offered a taste of the kind of reaction the teams are likely to meet if they propose taking scientists abroad.

''Believe me, this is a silly thing,'' he said, according to a Reuters report. ''They know everything, and they know that this is rubbish. But if they want to interview me, they can interview me any time they like.''

Asked if he would agree to leave Iraq for an interview, he replied: ''Definitely not. Why should I? Why should I? I am talking now freely. This is my country, my people, my family.''
Correction: Dec. 12, 2002
A front-page picture in some copies on Tuesday showing a United Nations weapons inspector looking through metal tanks at a pesticide factory near Fallujah, Iraq, carried an incorrect credit. It was by Tyler Hicks of The New York Times.
