

Baghdad Journal; When It Comes to Iraq's Boss, What Is Face Value?
By John F. Burns
Nov. 18, 2002

Things have been quiet lately in the small portrait gallery just off Sadoun Street in central Baghdad -- and one of the reasons is visible from where Salaam Abid sits through long days waiting for clients to commission new studies of the man Mr. Abid has devoted his career to painting, President Saddam Hussein.

On the sidewalk opposite Mr. Abid's gallery, a newly established business has set up a display of life-size, backlit photographs of the Iraqi leader, reproduced on all-weather fabric and mounted on aluminum frames. The photographs are the new fashion among those eager to have Mr. Hussein ever-present in their offices, courtyards and living rooms.

Opening the business across the street from Mr. Abid's studio was as clear a challenge as the artist could imagine.

''People prefer the photos,'' the 47-year-old painter said one recent afternoon. ''Don't ask me why people would want photographs. It's a purely mechanical thing, photography. I can't see the artistry in it at all.''

After more than 25 years, and several thousand portraits of the man whom Mr. Abid always calls ''His Excellency,'' things have taken a forlorn turn for the man known among Iraqis as Mr. Hussein's favorite artist. Commissions have been so sparse that the government ''minders'' who have taken a generation of reporters to interview him have taken to whispering that a financial ''gift'' for the dispirited painter might not be amiss.

Nor is the new competition across the street the whole of it. Although Mr. Abid tiptoes around the issue, it seems clear that he is competing for his share of a falling market. The hard fact seems to be that fewer Iraqis these days feel inclined -- or obliged -- to demonstrate their loyalty by buying portraits of the man who has ruled Iraq since 1979.

If Mr. Hussein had a court artist, in the way that Hans Holbein served Henry VIII, it would be Mr. Abid. His portraits of the 65-year-old Mr. Hussein -- stern-faced in a field marshal's uniform; benign and relaxed in straw boater; grand and imposing in the gold-trimmed robes of a Bedouin sheik; rakish in a middle-aged way in a leather jacket; the archetype of impartiality in a judge's robes, balancing golden scales, as well as a score of other iconic poses -- are found in every corner of Iraq.

But the way Mr. Hussein arranges his personal security -- with even army officers being strip-searched before being ushered, unarmed, into meetings with the Iraqi leader -- Mr. Abid has had to accept an awkwardly distanced role. All of his portraits have been reproduced from official photographs of Mr. Hussein.

He has only met Mr. Hussein once, four years ago, as part of a small group of artists invited to a reception at one of Mr. Hussein's vast Baghdad palaces. There, they spent 15 minutes in a receiving line before being hastened on their way. ''His Excellency said, 'I am happy you are here, because I heard that you are painting my photographs, so I wanted you to see me at close quarters,' '' Mr. Abid said.

To meet Mr. Abid is a way-station for any reporter touring Mr. Hussein's Iraq. But for those who want it to be, a discussion with the painter can also be a journey into the complex psychology that has helped keep Mr. Hussein in power through crises like the war he started with Iran in the 1980's, with its 500,000 Iraqi dead, and the disastrous invasion of Kuwait in 1990.

Among ordinary Iraqis, whisperings against Mr. Hussein are increasingly common, despite mortal risks. But as an iconographer, Mr. Abid is a study in the unshakable loyalty Mr. Hussein still appears to command among those ineluctably tied to his leadership. Although the threat of war with the United States appears to have made Mr. Hussein's prospects of remaining in power dimmer than at any time since he seized power in 1979, loyalists speak of him with unyielding reverence.

Partly, that reflects all Iraqis' fears when the subject is Mr. Hussein. But to listen to Mr. Abid is to hear something else -- a deep, unquestioning commitment of a kind that can withstand any succession of shocks. Days go by now without a single order for a portrait. But while that seems to have saddened him, it does not seem to have shaken the constancy of his belief.

He said that he had never painted a bad portrait of the Iraqi leader and never could. ''I have high skills, but that is not the point,'' he said. ''It's a question of inspiration. To paint His Excellency is the highest honor possible for any artist. It is simply not possible to paint him badly.''

Ask about the Iran-Iraq war; the Kuwait invasion; the thousands of Iraqis dragged off to dungeons; the impoverishment of many of Iraq's 22 million people under the penalties that have been the price for refusal to submit to unfettered weapons inspections -- and the responses follow an unshakable pattern.

''If you see Saddam Hussein at very close quarters, as I did, he displays all the characteristics of a prophet,'' Mr. Abid said.

Asked if President Bush's threat to invade Iraq had not confronted Mr. Hussein with a much greater personal threat than any he has previously faced, Mr. Abid smiled indulgently, as though anybody asking such a question had failed to comprehend all else he had said. ''I have a deep faith in God, and he has sent me visions in my dreams that tell me His Excellency will prevail,'' he said.

''For example, before the events in Kuwait, I saw a vision of His Excellency with the Emir of Kuwait. Recently, I had a vision of His Excellency meeting with Mr. Bush on a beach. Mr. Bush was walking a few steps behind His Excellency, in the manner of somebody showing respect. I understood what that meant -- that His Excellency had been confronted by America, and prevailed.''
