

THREATS AND RESPONSES: 101ST AIRBORNE DIVISION; Just South of Iraq, a Dress Rehearsal for Seizing Territory
By Jim Dwyer
March 18, 2003

WITH THE 101ST AIRBORNE DIVISION, Northern Kuwait, March 17 -- They have only a few more hours or days, it seems, to learn the craft of hitting first.

''Stop there,'' said Brig. Gen. Benjamin C. Freakley, the assistant division commander of the 101st Airborne.

He jumped out of a four-wheel-drive sport utility vehicle that had been bouncing along a trackless path in the desert. Alongside was a line of Humvees, steered by soldiers practicing formations. In the opening phase of an attack, these troops from the 101st would move deep into Iraq and set up stations for American attack helicopters.

General Freakley, as the leader of the assault command post for the 101st, will be the senior officer nearest to the division's battles. All this morning, he monitored dress rehearsals for seizing territory.

After months of planning by hundreds of military strategists, and with President Bush appearing to be on the verge of ordering an invasion of Iraq, General Freakley was using the dress rehearsal to drill simple, crucial moves for individual soldiers: how to see farther, how to duck away from trouble, how to avoid self-inflicted wounds.

At his first stop, the general did not like the position of a Humvee at the end of the line of vehicles. It had come to a halt about 100 yards from a slight rise in the desert. In a turret atop the Humvee was the gunner, a young soldier with both hands on a .50-caliber machine gun.

''What can you see?'' General Freakley asked. The soldier described his line of sight, which ended at a slight rise in the terrain 100 yards away. The weapon he was holding can hit targets up to one and a quarter miles away.

The general climbed on top of the Humvee to see for himself, then he scrambled down.

''With a ridge like this, you want to get just close enough so you can see over it,'' General Freakley (pronounced FRAKE-lee) explained. ''The gunner has to work with the driver for the position.''

The soldiers nodded. Then they rolled forward, until the gunner tapped on the roof. By moving about 50 feet, he suddenly had a clear view over the rise and could see dozens of trucks moving along a desert path that stretched nearly a mile before another rise. The Army calls the position where he stopped the ''intervisibility line.''

Lesson taught, lesson learned, the general moved on. He spotted another Humvee in the convoy that had not quite pulled off the road. ''They need to get off the road and into the herringbone pattern,'' the general said.

When a convoy halts, either for maintenance or to avoid an air attack, the vehicles in a straight line or column are very easy targets, General Freakley explained. In that formation, the person attacking could simply rake the line without adjusting the range. When the vehicles park in a herringbone pattern, their irregular depths make for a much harder sequence of targets.

Would the Iraqi troops be likely to practice such fundamental evasions in their convoys? ''The Iraqis I engaged in Desert Storm did not have many fundamentals,'' General Freakley said.

At another stop, he climbed out and spoke with the gunner, who was standing in the turret, and urged him to drop lower into a sling. He would present less of a target.

Perhaps as important, a gunner sitting lower would have a greater ability to survive if the Humvee were to roll over on the long journey toward Baghdad, whether from an attack or by accident. The gunner might be able to drop quickly into the body of the vehicle and escape being crushed.

Where, the general wanted to know, was the medical kit? Could they put their hands on it? Was it buried too deep under the other gear?

He put those questions to soldiers in a few different Humvees, and when they volunteered to pull out the kits, he demurred. If they knew where the kits were, that was good enough for him. In those assurances, there was a touch of the teacher not wanting to embarrass pupils who might have been guessing about where the kit was stashed; surely, they would find it after he left and keep it at hand.

In 1991, when the United States drove Iraqis out of Kuwait, the war proved to be a rout; by some counts, the majority of American casualties on the ground were inflicted by American or allied fire, what the Army calls fratricide.

Some military planners suspect that if there is an invasion, the most serious threat to the health and safety of the United States forces could come from such accidents, particularly if the Iraqi military does not offer much resistance. General Freakley said the American commanders must protect their own forces with ''situational awareness,'' keeping track of where people are and ensuring that any orders to fire are preceded by a positive identification of the target.

Among the new tools to prevent fratricide are simple thermal panels that are fitted on top of vehicles. These are spread over the roof, often on top of a spare tire. The purpose is to change the normal heat pattern of trucks and jeeps, because that is what pilots in airplane and gunners in tanks see through their thermal imaging system. The irregular pattern would identify the vehicle as friendly.

Other devices include the Phoenix beacon, a small light about the size of a cigarette lighter that is attached to the vehicle. The light it produces is invisible to the eye, but can be seen through infrared sighting systems. These consume 9-volt batteries about every 10 hours, however, and the Army has a five-day supply. More are aboard cargo ships that are en route.

Another system that is being widely used for the first time in combat is the Blue Force Tracker, which allows command posts to see the position of each vehicle equipped with the device. It works by sending signals to a satellite.

