

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Chief Weapons Inspector Urges Iraq to Accept New Rules as Team Awaits Resolution
By Julia Preston
Oct. 16, 2002

The chief of the United Nations weapons inspectors appealed to Iraq today to agree to arrangements for new inspections but said his weapons teams would only return to Iraq after the Security Council adopts a resolution giving them a new mandate.

Reporting to a closed meeting of the Council, the weapons official, Hans Blix, said he still had no agreement with Iraq on several inspection issues: helicopter flights for his teams; conditions for interviews of Iraqi weapons experts, and permission for U-2 or Mirage photographic surveillance flights over Iraq.

Since the inspectors are waiting for the Council to act, he added, they will not arrive in Baghdad on Oct. 19, the date Iraq had offered to receive the advance teams.

The five weeks of marathon diplomacy over the tough resolution that President Bush is seeking to force Iraq to disarm continued today. But there was no discernible progress on any front, and diplomats throughout the United Nations grew increasingly impatient.

France came forward with proposals to try to break its deadlock with the United States, but to no avail.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell met in Washington with the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw. In statements afterward, the two men sought to link the confrontation with President Saddam Hussein to the global campaign against terrorism and the bloody car bombing in Bali.

In Beijing, meanwhile, Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, met with China's president, Jiang Zemin, and the Chinese foreign minister, Tang Jiaxuan.

Mr. Jiang said that ''peace is the most valuable thing,'' so he wanted to resolve the crisis politically, said Zhang Qiyue, the Chinese foreign ministry spokeswoman. She also said China wanted the weapons inspectors to return to Iraq as soon as possible to provide an ''objective and researched report'' on its weapons programs. The Council should decide what to do based on that report, she said.

The comments were some of the most extensive yet by China, a permanent veto-bearing member of the Security Council that has been watching quietly while the United States and France, traditional allies, tussle over how to proceed if Iraq refuses to disarm.

Beijing appears to be supporting France, which wants two stages, with a vote on the use of force based on the results of inspections. The United States wants a single resolution setting up rigorous weapons inspections, with an authorization to attack Iraq if it fails to cooperate.

Secretary Powell said today that Iraq had to be disarmed because it had supported ''terrorists'' and was making prohibited weapons. ''That's why I think Iraq is very much part of this overall campaign,'' he said. ''We continue to believe that one resolution will suffice.''

He added, as he has day after day in the long negotiation, that he remains ''hopeful that we will find a solution.''

Mr. Blix gave the Council his assessment of two letters Baghdad sent to him last week to follow up on their meetings in Vienna early this month. Both letters were sharply criticized by the United States and other permanent Council members.

While Mr. Blix said there was ''a large area of common understanding'' with Baghdad on the nuts-and-bolts arrangements, he also said Baghdad had not reconfirmed all the agreements that he believed he had reached with the Iraqi officials in Vienna. Iraq has not agreed to allow the inspectors to open regional offices, Mr. Blix said.

He said the ''simplest way to clear up remaining points'' would be for Baghdad to give its broad approval.

A senior State Department official expressed skepticism that inspectors would ever be allowed unfettered access in Iraq.

''If the inspectors get back in, it's essentially a certainty that Saddam Hussein will try and obstruct them,'' said John R. Bolton, the undersecretary of state for arms control and international security. ''I don't know whether that will be the first day, or the second day or the day after. His desire to keep his weapons of mass destruction is an inherent part of his strategy for staying in power.''

Mr. Bolton said America's policy of toppling the leadership in Baghdad meant not only Mr. Hussein, but senior members of his government, and he compared the process to de-Nazification undertaken by the allies in Germany after World War II.

American policy to change the government in Baghdad is targeted at ''not just Saddam,'' Mr. Bolton said at a breakfast meeting with correspondents.

''It's not just the one person, obviously, it's the top people around him,'' he said. ''I think one element that would have to be part of any post-Saddam process would be, in effect, the analog to de-Nazification, to take out the people at the top of the Iraqi regime who are so fundamentally part of Saddam's entourage that their remaining in power would have the problem persist.''

Mr. Bolton also drew a comparison to what occurred in Afghanistan under Hamid Karzai after American and allied forces routed the Taliban from power.

The goal for Iraq is ''not that different from what we did in Afghanistan, where many people who were part of the Taliban administration, but were not really Taliban adherents, were allowed to stay in their positions,'' Mr. Bolton said.

He indicated that purging the Iraqi government of Mr. Hussein's loyalists might be left to Iraqi citizens. ''That's the kind of thing that the Iraqi opposition and opposition leaders inside Iraq would be looking at after Saddam left,'' he said.

In Iraq today, allied warplanes attacked an Iraqi military communications facility near Al Kut, about 100 miles southeast of Baghdad, the United States Central Command reported.

The attack came after Iraqi air-defense forces fired surface-to-air missiles and antiaircraft artillery at British or American aircraft patrolling the southern no-flight zone, the Central Command statement said. It was the 50th day of strikes this year against Iraqi command-and-control or air defenses in northern and southern Iraq, a military official said.

In Baghdad, an Iraqi military spokesman said one civilian was wounded and two homes were destroyed in the attack.
