

Anti-Baghdad Talks Shunned by Top Kurd
By Patrick E. Tyler
Aug. 15, 2002

The most powerful Kurdish chieftain in northern Iraq, Massoud Barzani, refused the Bush administration's invitation to attend the meeting of Iraqi opposition figures at the White House last week, Kurdish and administration officials said today.

The absence of Mr. Barzani, whose father, Mustafa Barzani, led the largest Kurdish rebellion of the last century and died in exile in the United States, was a blow to Bush administration officials who had orchestrated the meeting in part to demonstrate that Iraqi opposition forces were unified behind a new campaign to oust Saddam Hussein.

In a feverish effort to entice Mr. Barzani to leave northern Iraq and travel to Washington, the administration offered to send a private airplane to southeastern Turkey to pick him up, according to Kurdish and American officials.

In an additional inducement, American officials said that if Mr. Barzani would travel with his longtime rival, Jalal Talabani, on an American aircraft, it was likely the two Kurdish leaders would be treated to a meeting with President Bush. In the end, Mr. Talabani came by himself and the conference was hosted by Vice President Dick Cheney on video link from Wyoming. The explanation given for Mr. Barzani's refusal to attend involved both logistical problems and a response to broken American promises.

An administration official said, ''Barzani really more so than anyone is the elder statesman of the Iraqi opposition and we did try to arrange for him to be here, and obviously we did not succeed.''

Mr. Barzani's decision to stay in Iraq indicates that a crisis may be looming with Turkey, administration officials said. Turkish officials have warned that they are prepared to go to war to prevent the Iraqi Kurds from declaring a kind of mini-Kurdish state within Iraq.

The Turkish government fears that such a state with control over key oil resources around Kirkuk might incite Turkey's repressed Kurdish population to rebel.

''We are by no means finished discussing things with the Turks,'' one official said. Kurdish officials said the American dialogue with Ankara about the prospect for an American-led military campaign against Iraq had been far more contentious than the Bush administration had conveyed publicly.

In Mr. Barzani's absence, Mr. Talabani has been more receptive to joining with the United States in a war against Baghdad. He caused a stir Monday when he offered in one television interview to turn the Kurdish region of northern Iraq into an American military base against Baghdad, and then retracted his statement saying his remarks had been misinterpreted.

Pentagon planners have identified the Kurdish fighters as a credible force to work with American Special Forces, much as the Northern Alliance did in Afghanistan, to attack Iraqi troops, identify targets for American aircraft and conduct other guerrilla operations. Last month, a Pentagon team secretly visited northern Iraq to inspect the Kurdish militia, one official said.

Washington's effort to assemble the anti-Hussein coalition was devised to demonstrate to reluctant European and Middle Eastern allies that the United States had recruited Iraqi opposition leaders who not only command military forces on the battlefield and who could participate in an American attack on Baghdad, but who could also, along with other opposition groups, step in to create a viable and democratic political structure to replace the current government.

Mr. Barzani sent a representative to Washington to tell the Bush administration that it had failed to follow up on promises made last April when Mr. Barzani was spirited into the United States on a Central Intelligence Agency flight for a meeting with top C.I.A., Pentagon and State Department officials.

The officials had been courting Mr. Barzani for months in hopes of recruiting 70,000 Kurdish fighters under his control and that of Mr. Talabani, for any military assault on Iraq.

Chief among the broken promises, he said, was Washington's failure to address the possibility that Mr. Hussein might launch a pre-emptive strike on the Kurds before the administration had built up its forces in the region.

On Saturday, Mr. Cheney reiterated that if Iraq attacked the Kurds, the United States would respond at a time and place of its choosing, according to administration officials and opposition leaders. The Kurds want a more immediate response to protect the three million civilians in their towns and villages.

Mr. Talabani says he is equally concerned about the seriousness with which the Bush administration is proceeding. ''They promised us training, equipment and money and they didn't do anything up to now,'' Mr. Talabani said. The Kurdish officials also requested tens of thousands of gas masks and mobile clinics to treat chemical weapons victims in case Mr. Hussein should lash out at the Kurdish population with poison gases, according to Mr. Barzani's representative, Hoshyar Zebari. Iraq used chemical weapons on Iran at the end of the Iran-Iraq war, waged from 1981 to 1988.

Mr. Barzani's reticence about openly declaring hostility toward Baghdad stems in part from his extensive business dealings with members of Mr. Hussein's family, where the illicit trade in oil, smuggled cigarettes and other goods is creating great wealth in the Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq and among the Iraqi elites still holding power in Baghdad. But Mr. Zebari said that this trade had come to an end as Mr. Hussein had routed much of the traffic in illicit goods through Syria.

Mr. Barzani's aides said that an increasingly bitter dispute with Turkey was one of the reasons that caused him to stay home.

''We are experiencing serious difficulties with Turkey; they are playing divide and conquer,'' Mr. Zebari said. Turkey this month suddenly canceled Mr. Barzani's diplomatic passport and made it difficult for American military officials at the Incirlik Air Base in Turkey to provide air transport to Mr. Barzani. Mr. Zebari said today that Mr. Barzani could have traveled by way of Syria. ''But he has his calculations and he has a number of questions about why the American officials promised so many things and yet nothing was met,'' Mr. Zebari said.
