

The World: Saddam's Swan Song; The Logic of Disproving a Negative
By Emily Eakin
Dec. 15, 2002

HOW many pages does it take to prove a negative? Iraq is hoping 12,000 might do the trick. That, roughly, is the number of pages in the declaration it turned over to the United Nations in a last-ditch effort to convince the world that it has no weapons of mass destruction. For the moment, the United Nations and the United States are playing along, scouring the document page by page last week for signs that Iraq is lying or fudging the truth.

But while the exercise may make for good politics, as a philosophical proposition it is arguably deeply flawed. In fact, some scholars would say the task the world has assigned Iraq -- to prove it has no weapons of mass destruction -- is logically impossible.

The problem is not, as is frequently assumed, that proving a negative simply can't be done.

''If I say I have no coins in my pocket, you can just search me,'' said Colin McGinn, a professor of philosophy at Rutgers University, pointing out that people verify modest negative statements all the time with little difficulty.

But philosophically speaking, there's a big difference between claiming there are no coins in your pocket and claiming there are no coins in the pockets of New Yorkers, or, more to the point, no weapons of mass destruction anywhere in the nearly 170,000 square miles that make up the state of Iraq.

As the scope of the claim grows, so do the number of philosophical objections and practical obstacles to proving it. This is where the work of the 18th-century Scottish philosopher David Hume comes in. In a dazzling insight that changed the course of Western philosophy, Hume demonstrated that the common practice of induction (inferring general rules from particular observations) is inherently circular and unreliable.

Philosophers like to explain Hume's argument using swans. Ronald J. Allen, a law professor and evidence expert at Northwestern University, put it this way: ''Suppose somebody claims all the swans are white. He says, 'I'll prove it to you.' He takes you to the zoo, and there are 20 swans there, all white. Well, he's merely showing you a finite set of swans. This can't establish that all swans are white.''

Because no one can ever observe all the swans in the world, but only particular groups of swans, according to Hume it would be logically indefensible to conclude that all swans are white no matter how reasonable such an inference seems.

This same difficulty arises in trying to prove some large-scope negatives, Mr. Allen points out. ''Suppose you assert that there are no black swans,'' he said. ''You'd have to produce all the swans in the world to show there are no black ones'' -- an impossible undertaking.

This, he said, is the situation faced by Iraq. ''You can see the perversity of it,'' Mr. Allen said. ''The Iraqis have to show that there's no state of the universe inconsistent with the statement that they have no weapons of mass destruction.''

IF Mr. Allen is right, weapons inspections that turn up nothing, and a 12,000-page declaration that discloses no violations, are of extremely limited value. Like groups of white swans, they might tell us something particular but nothing general. They certainly don't prove anything about Iraq's claim that it possesses no weapons of mass destruction.

Of course, it is possible to argue that Iraq's situation more closely resembles Mr. McGinn's single pocket example (a small-scope, easily verified negative) than it does Mr. Allen's black swan example (a large-scope, unverifiable negative).

''Iraq is big, but not that big,'' said Simon Blackburn, a professor of philosophy at Cambridge University and a leading authority on Hume. ''There is no more difficulty to prove there are no weapons of mass destruction than to prove there's no rhinoceros in my sitting room.''

But other scholars concede that the burden of proof placed on Iraq by the United Nations is so great that no amount of evidence is likely to suffice. The Bush administration has often spoken of Iraq's intention to acquire weapons of mass destruction, said Brian Leiter, a professor of law and philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin. Once intention becomes a factor, he said, Iraq's situation begins to look more and more like the black swan problem -- an unverifiable negative.

''I'm willing to venture it's impossible for anyone to prove they don't have the intention to do something,'' he said, adding that placing such a burden on an American criminal defendant -- who, unlike Iraq, is guaranteed a presumption of innocence -- would be unthinkable.

If Iraq's task is demonstrably impossible, on what basis can it be justified? Ultimately, the best defense may hinge not on logic or law but on more nebulous concepts like experience and common sense.

''The thing we're asking them to prove, whether you put it positively or negatively, is so extremely hard to prove that we're almost rigging the outcome by the way we put the question,'' said Laurence H. Tribe, the Harvard professor of constitutional law. ''But it doesn't follow that we're acting in a way that's contrary to all our conventional jurisprudential principles.''

CITING Iraq's past use of weapons of mass destruction and long record of duplicity on the issue, Mr. Tribe argued that ''we're acting in a preventative mode where we're not prepared as an international community to take the risk that potential mass destruction will go uncontrolled.''

That's a statement that Hume might have found perfectly reasonable. A practical man, he realized that in the absence of certain knowledge, experience and common sense are often the best guides to judgment. The danger arises when fallible human judgments are confused with truth.

In the end, Hume argued, the inevitable uncertainty of knowledge requires, in response, a rigorous policy of ''mitigated skepticism'' -- the constant application of ''a degree of doubt, and caution, and modesty, which, in all kinds of scrutiny and decision, ought for ever to accompany a just reasoner.''
