

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ALLIANCES; An Iranian-Backed Brigade, With Ties to the Kurds, Sets Up Camp in Northern Iraq
By C. J. Chivers
March 3, 2003

Advance elements of the Badr Brigade, an Iranian-backed militia that includes many deserters from Iraq's army, are building a new military encampment in northern Iraq, and preparing to move several thousand fighters into the area, according to local Kurdish officials familiar with the deployment and a visit to the camp.

The expanding activities of the brigade, which intelligence officials say receives support from the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and might fight as an Iranian proxy against President Saddam Hussein, pose fresh diplomatic challenges to both Kurdish authorities and the United States.

The camp is located 11 miles inside Iraq and about 135 miles from Baghdad, in territory outside the Iraqi government's control and administered by Kurds. It included 94 squad-sized tents on Saturday and more than 120 this afternoon -- enough to shelter more than 1,000 of the group's fighters.

As tents rose today, the brigade's intention of occupying Iraqi soil was clear. The fighters, who call themselves mujahedeen, had already opened a small grocery, had at least one antiaircraft machine gun and a large ammunition bunker, and were digging latrines throughout a series of rocky bluffs at the base of this mountain.

One supervisor said they were prepared to join with Kurds to resist a Turkish incursion into northern Iraq. ''If our supreme council approves it, we will support them against the Turks,'' said Murtaza Musawi, who identified himself as the camp security officer.

That appears to be the sort of prospect that has raised concern in Washington, where the Bush administration has tried to limit regional intervention in the event of war with Iraq and has labeled Iran a member of the ''axis of evil.''

''We think any Iranian presence or Iranian-supported presence in that region is destabilizing and not positive,'' Richard Boucher, spokesman for the State Department, said last month.

The new camp is sign of the deeply tangled local situation the United States confronts as it prepares for war here.

The Badr Brigade, estimated to have 15,000 fighters in all, is the military wing of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a member of the Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella opposition group that has been backed by the United States.

But the brigade also has long resided in Iran, which provides it with material, intelligence and training support, intelligence officials said. It sees itself as a prominent voice for Shiite Muslims, who make up roughly 60 percent of the Iraqi population. Its relations with Washington have been prickly.

The Supreme Council has made clear its displeasure with the notion of any American occupation in Iraq, and, in a recent interview, a council official said the current American military buildup was the latest manifestation of a Washington blunder.

The official, Galib al-Asadi, a council representative in northern Iraq, noted that after the Persian Gulf war in 1991, the United States allowed Iraq to keep much of its army and to use helicopter gunships to suppress uprisings that almost toppled Mr. Hussein.

''If the United States didn't help the Iraqi regime in 1991, it would not need this war,'' he said.

Mr. Asadi also suggested that the brigade's military activities would be wholly independent of American plans, a stance that runs counter to Pentagon preferences for coordinating, if not commanding, forces taking part in wars the United States fights.

''We are not going to fight alongside the Americans,'' he said. ''We were fighting the Iraqi regime when the United States was helping the Iraqi regime, and we will continue to fight the regime whether the United States comes or not.''

Tensions between Washington and Iran have presented Kurdish authorities with a delicate problem.

Kurds want a military and political partnership with the United States, and are loathe to fall on Washington's bad side just at the moment they expect Mr. Hussein to be forced from power. But they have longstanding relations with the Supreme Council and Iran.

Many Kurds, particularly in the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, which took refuge in Iran in 1996 when the rival Kurdistan Democratic Party attacked them with Iraqi forces, feel a loyalty to their Iranian neighbors. Some also sympathize with the brigade, whose fighters and their families have suffered terribly under Mr. Hussein.

Kurdish officials said the brigade has asked them to allow 5,000 troops onto Iraqi soil. The Patriotic Union has not acted on the request, and a senior official said tonight that developments at the camp were being closely followed and discussed. ''We are reviewing the situation,'' he said.

How many brigade fighters are in northern Iraq remains unclear.

Residents of the nearby village of Banibee said that three weeks ago a team of brigade fighters toured the area, looking over ground and interviewing shepherds.

Farouk Abdullah, a Patriotic Union customs officer on duty at a checkpoint near the camp, said fighters first arrived on Feb. 24, driving in on three buses and beginning to erect tents. Since then, more buses have arrived with more fighters, and three cargo trucks, visible today, have been bringing in equipment.

The fighters themselves, of whom about 100 were visible today, refused to discuss their strength. Villagers said members of the brigade have told them they have 1,100 fighters here so far.

The Badr Brigade has maintained a garrison in northern Iraq since 1998, when the Kurdish Patriotic Union allowed 50 to 60 fighters to base in a forlorn little compound in the nearby village of Maidan. It was allowed to increase its strength to as high as 250 since 2000, said Lt. Colonel Kamaran Abdullah, a Patriotic Union security chief.

The colonel noted the Maidan group, which typically held military exercises about once each year, has conducted three exercises in the last two months, including a night exercise on Feb. 18 at which it practiced attacking bunkers, and fired machine guns and mortars.

Local intelligence reports have also noted an increase in military exercises, and said the brigade has recently conducted training with gas masks and in urban combat.
