

VIGILANCE AND MEMORY: RIVAL FACTIONS; 3 Groups Already Squabbling Over Oil-Flush North Iraq Should Hussein Be Toppled
By Craig S. Smith
Sept. 12, 2002

While the Bush administration has yet to decide whether to attack Iraq, rival ethnic groups in the north of that country are already squabbling over the spoils of any future war.

Their focus is Kirkuk, a city with vast reserves of high-quality oil so close to the surface that in one area natural gas escaping from the ground has been on fire since antiquity. Iraq's Arabs control the city, but both ethnic Kurds and the Turkmen minority claim it as their own and all three groups want power over it and its oil if Saddam Hussein falls.

''We will have control of this city; that is what we are fighting for,'' said Mustafa Ziya, the Ankara representative of the Iraqi Turkmen Front, a coalition of 26 Turkmen groups vying for representation in a post-Hussein Iraqi government. They have the backing of Turkey, which has yet to voice support for American military action against Iraq but wants a finger in the Iraqi pie should the Bush administration make a successful move.

Yet, the Kurdish Democratic Party, the more powerful of two Kurdish groups that control northern Iraq, is determined to make Kirkuk the political capital and economic heart of a Kurdish federal state in a future Iraq. It has already drafted an Iraqi constitution outlining such a state with Kirkuk as its most important city.

''Kirkuk is a Kurdish city,'' said Safeen Dizayee, the K.D.P.'s representative in Ankara. ''Even the Ottoman archives show that.''

The brewing battle suggests that any fighting inside Iraq will not end with Mr. Hussein's ouster and that the United States may be drawn into mediating Iraqi factional disputes or risk unleashing a blood bath if it succeeds in unseating the current government.

The dispute also puts the Bush administration between rival groups on whom it would have to depend in any war. The United States is likely to use Turkish air bases to attack Iraq and is expected to ask for support from the northern Iraqi Kurds, whose forces number in the tens of thousands.

The Kirkuk dispute flared last week when the K.D.P.'s leader, Massoud Barzani, was quoted in a German newspaper as saying that he would ''never allow Turks to take over even a millimeter of our soil,'' and that if Turkey invaded northern Iraq, his fighters would turn the territory into a ''graveyard for Turkish soldiers.''

Those comments, which Mr. Barzani has since said were ''distorted'' by the press, prompted the deputy speaker of the Turkish Parliament on Friday to suggest that Ankara declare an autonomous region in northern Iraq for the Turkmen minority, a Turkic people with historical ties to Turkey and who are Iraq's third-largest ethnic group. That region would include oil-rich Kirkuk.

Already, Turkey has threatened to intervene in northern Iraq if the Kurds there declare an independent state or attack the Turkmen minority in any battle for Kirkuk that might follow possible American action. Turkey has soldiers in northern Iraq, although the deputy governor in charge of the only land crossing between Turkey and Iraq has denied reports that the country had moved another 1,000 troops across the border in recent days.

Kirkuk lies at the southwestern edge of the Kurds' traditional homeland and was peopled by Turkmen groups during the Ottoman empire. The city was still under Ottoman control at the end of World War I, when the British seized it for its oil and later incorporated it into Iraq. The Kurds have long argued that it is their territory and want the economic power that it would give a Kurdish federal state.

The Kurds occupied Kirkuk after the 1991 Persian Gulf war, only to be routed by Iraqi troops a few days later in what became a devastating mass exodus of Kurds from the region until the United States and Britain gave them protection by creating a ''no-flight zone'' north of the 36th parallel. That zone does not cover Kirkuk, however, which has remained in Mr. Hussein's hands and is a principal source of his income today under the United Nations' food-for-oil program. The program allows the export of a limited amount of crude oil from Kirkuk and Iraq's other major oil-producing region, in the country's south.

In an attempt to change the ethnic makeup of the Kirkuk area, Mr. Hussein has settled Arabs in the city and pressured the Kurdish and Turkmen groups alike to change their legal ethnic identity to Arab or lose their right to own property or even to live in Kirkuk. The Arab majority will certainly try to retain control of the region if Mr. Hussein is removed.

Turkey, which produces little oil of its own, has its own economic interests at stake. A long line of Turkish tanker trucks cross the border daily on their way to Kirkuk to fill up with Iraqi oil, a technically illegal trade outside the United Nations oil-for-food program that is tolerated by the United States and its allies because of the damage the Turkish economy has suffered from the economic sanctions against Iraq.

Turkey also opposes Kurdish control of Kirkuk because that would strengthen Kurdish autonomy and, they say, encourage the estimated 20 million ethnic Kurds in Turkey to also demand autonomy. Turkey has fought a 15-year war with Kurdish separatists in the southeastern part of its country and many Turks remain convinced that the fast-growing Kurdish minority harbors a desire for a Kurdish state within Turkey or even an independent Kurdistan.

''A federal state in northern Iraq will be the first step on the way to an independent Kurdish state,'' said Umit Ozdag, chairman of the conservative Turkish policy institute, Asam. ''And it will be impossible to establish a federal state divided on ethnic lines without blood.''

Sevket Bulent Yahnici, an official with M.H.P., one of the parties in Turkey's governing coalition, put it more bluntly: ''If the Kurds declare a separate state in northern Iraq, we will be forced to invade.''