

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WEAPONS SLEUTHS; Many Iraqis, Like Their Government, Complain About Arms Inspections
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 23, 2003

''This is a drill,'' the former chicken farmer said today, pointing to what was undeniably a drill, illuminated in a dark shed by a line of lights atop television cameras. ''This is not a computer.''

There was a slight edge of the surreal in the scene at a defunct chicken farm here, the site of two recent inspections by the United Nations, just south of Baghdad. There was mud, toppled brick, the sweet scent of an orange grove and the must of old chicken droppings.

Reporters from around the world watched dutifully, for what was really on display was the ambivalence -- anger mixed with hope -- with which Iraq apparently views the new United Nations mission to find chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.

On one hand, war just might be averted if the inspectors, at work for two months now, turn up nothing.

On the other, Iraqis seem ever more offended by the inspections, and the government appears to be encouraging public complaints about them, even as its officials agreed this week to expand cooperation with the United Nations.

Today the Information Ministry organized two news conferences with Iraqis who felt violated by the inspections. Tonight the imam of Al Nida Mosque in Baghdad, a new and grand house of worship, said inspectors had gone there on Monday, taking photographs and asking questions about its construction. A spokesman for the inspection teams in Baghdad, Yasuhiro Ueki, said that he was not aware that any mosque had been inspected, but that he was looking into the report.

The number of inspectors, 17 when the inspections resumed two months ago, has now reached 112.

''Are they looking for weapons of mass destruction or are they investigating the faith in our hearts?'' asked the imam, Koteiba Saadi Amash. ''This is provocative to the Muslims of Iraq.''

Earlier in the day, the former chicken farmer, Sabah Anwar Muhammad, 59, said United Nations inspectors had gone to his farm twice -- searching, he asserted, for evidence of biological weapons.

On the second visit, on Monday, inspectors ripped down some brickwork to get inside a work shed that had been completely sealed off. They found the drill, a band saw, paint cans, tangled hoses, a broken bicycle and chicken feeding trays. Mr. Muhammad said there had been no signs of weapons.

Now he is angry and says he has filed suit through the Iraqi Foreign Ministry for reparations.

''According to your Western laws, is this allowed to happen?'' Mr. Muhammad asked. ''Trespassing? Forced entry? Demolition of walls? I am a citizen and a human being like anybody else, trying to make a living.''

On one level the inspectors are accepted here as a wedge against any American attack. They are also used to attack the Bush administration.

Writing today in the influential newspaper Babel, President Saddam Hussein's older son, Uday, who owns the daily, noted, for example, ''Little Bush knows very well that Iraq doesn't possess weapons of mass destruction, but he is repeating his accusation against Iraq because he has failed to prove the opposite.''

Also today, hundreds of Iraqis demonstrated outside the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad, burning an American flag and an effigy of Mr. Bush. Students also rallied against biological weapons inspectors who turned up today at the Technology Institute in Baghdad.

The anger seems fueled in part by wounded pride, by the presence of what they see as arrogant foreigners banging down the closed doors of a sovereign nation. President Hussein has charged that the inspectors are engaged in spying.

But there is also the worry that no matter what the inspectors conclude, Mr. Bush will order an attack.

''From the news we hear, it seems war is now inevitable,'' said Mr. Muhammad's brother, Alaa Anwar Muhammad, 57.

The story of Mr. Muhammad's chicken farm began circulating on Monday, when Mr. Hussein's top science adviser, Lt. Gen. Amir al-Saadi, mentioned the incident in a news conference. Reporters asked to meet Mr. Muhammad, who at first refused, but was encouraged to speak by Iraqi officials.

Mr. Muhammad, by training a lawyer and the co-owner of a family plastics business, rose to the occasion. First he appeared at a jampacked news conference, then he led reporters on a tour of the farm.

At one point he reached into his briefcase and retrieved two locks, which he said had become the focus of a heated dispute between him and the inspectors. The inspectors, he said, refused to accept that they had put those locks on the door after their first visit last week.

''Is it possible that these locks would cause an international crisis?'' he asked.

Mr. Muhammad said he bought the farm in 1988. The farm, which has room for 60,000 chickens, was closed after the Persian Gulf war of 1991, he said, because sanctions against Iraq made it difficult to import the protein and medicine needed to keep the birds healthy.

The focus of the inspections, he said, turned to a small brick storage shed. Mr. Muhammad said he had bricked up the two windows and door after a robbery several years ago. He said inspectors had asked for tools to tear down a section of brick that covered the steel door.

Mr. Ueki, the spokesman for the inspections teams in Baghdad, said the shed had raised suspicions. ''The building was totally blocked off,'' he said, ''so our inspectors naturally got curious about what was inside.''

He declined to say whether they had found anything of substance, but noted that they did find ''farm equipment.''

As a matter of policy in performing delicate work, he said, ''our inspectors are trying to minimize the effects of inspections as much as possible.''

But Mr. Muhammad said he wanted an apology, to him personally and to Iraq.

''An unwelcome visitor, who crashes into your house, all of you can probably imagine the kind of awkward situation we find ourselves,'' he said. ''If we Iraqis would crash into their houses, would they take this easily?''