
THREATS AND RESPONSES: EUROPE; Blair Sees Iraq Weakening As France Resists Early War
By Warren Hoge
Jan. 22, 2003

Prime Minister Tony Blair told senior members of Parliament today that a ''massive amount'' of new intelligence suggested that the escalation of armed forces in the Persian Gulf is shaking Saddam Hussein and undermining his rule over Iraq.

But in a vivid illustration of Europe's divergent views on Iraq, France said it would press the European Union, which includes Britain, to oppose any hasty decision to fight. Germany already has said it would oppose a war. While Italy and Spain have tacitly approved Britain's position, public opinion in Europe is increasingly tilted against a military operation to depose Mr. Hussein.

Speaking a day after Britain announced it was putting more than a quarter of its 109,000-member army in position for combat with Iraq, Mr. Blair said, ''The one thing that is very obvious is that as a result of the military buildup and as a result of the determination to see this thing through, the regime in Iraq and Saddam are weakening.

''They are rattled, they are weakening, we are getting a massive amount of intelligence out of there now as to what is happening in Iraq, and that is why we have to keep up the pressure every inch of the way,'' he said.

Mr. Blair did not elaborate on the intelligence indicating that Mr. Hussein's power has been shaken.

In Brussels, France's foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, offered a sharply different assessment of the military buildup, warning against the use of force at a time when the United Nations inspectors were seeking more time to pursue their search for evidence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. ''We see no justification today for an intervention, since the inspectors are able to do their work,'' he said. ''We could not support unilateral action.''

Mr. de Villepin said France would work with other European countries to forge a united front against American efforts to push for military action before there was a clear signal from the inspectors and agreement by the United Nations Security Council.

''I think that we can together, with the agreement of the four countries'' -- the European members of the Security Council -- ''try to lead Europe in this common position,'' he said, reiterating that France regarded the United Nations weapons inspectors' report, to be presented to the Security Council on Monday, as an interim report and that the inspectors must be given more time to complete their job.

France's efforts come as European public opposition to a war appears to be hitting a new peak. Opinion polls in France, Britain and Germany this month show a growing number of people -- 32 percent in Britain, 76 percent in Germany and 77 percent in France -- are against military action even with the blessing of the United Nations.

Few Europeans believe that Iraq presents an imminent threat to their security while many fear that military action could bring a terrorist backlash to their shores. The opposition also reflects a deep uneasiness with America's increasingly assertive role as the world's only superpower.

Mr. Blair gave his views during a two-and-a-half-hour televised grilling by House of Commons committee heads, many of whom take issue with his hard-line policy on Iraq and his close association with the United States and President Bush.

Placard-waving protesters crowded Parliament Square outside, giving raucous voice to the antiwar movement. Mr. Blair told the lawmakers that while getting a new resolution from the United Nations authorizing force was Britain's preference, it was not viewed as necessary.

Asked whether he thought that an attack by Al Qaeda on Britain was inevitable, he said, ''I think it's inevitable that they will try in some form or other, and I think we can see evidence from recent arrests that the terrorist network is here, as it is around the rest of the world.''

In Britain's biggest antiterror operation since the Sept. 11 attacks, the police on Monday raided a London mosque depicted as a recruiting ground for Islamic radicals, arrested seven people and confiscated weapons, false identity papers and computer files.

Asked if he was concerned at the lack of support for a possible war in many European countries, Mr. Blair noted that there had been reservations on the Continent about military action in Kosovo and Afghanistan too. ''Some do support what we are doing, actually,'' he added, singling out Italy and Spain.

Mr. Blair's increasingly militant stand is a change in tone for the British government. For weeks British diplomats had stressed that the arms inspections in Iraq were working reasonably well and they urged American officials to allow more time for them. British envoys argued that chances were good that the inspectors would either find some prohibited weapons or encounter such opposition from Iraq that they would eventually report to the Council that Iraq had not disarmed.

But on Monday, at a meeting of 13 foreign ministers in New York, British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw reverted to a message that echoed Washington's, saying, ''The moment of choice for Saddam is close.''

United Nations diplomats said Britain's shift prompted France to harden its line in favor of a longer timetable for the inspections. With Mr. Blair scheduled to meet President Bush at Camp David on Jan. 31, France feared that the center of decision-making was shifting out of the Security Council to Washington and London, the diplomats said.

Questioned in the House of Commons about what appeared to be mixed messages from his government, Mr. Blair said today he had been ''coy'' about making Britain's position clear as a way of keeping pressure on Mr. Hussein. ''We are trying to put maximum pressure on them,'' he said, ''and if I am sometimes coy about speculating what happens on Jan. 27 or if the inspectors say this or that, it is because I don't want to do anything that weakens that enormous pressure coming to bear on the regime either to cooperate or, frankly, to crumble.''
