

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE STRATEGY; U.S. Plans to Pressure Iraq By Encouraging Scientists To Leak Data to Inspectors
By David E. Sanger
Nov. 9, 2002

Moments after celebrating the Security Council's unanimous vote to disarm Iraq, President Bush today urged that country's thousands of weapons scientists and members of its military to slip information to inspectors ''in whatever manner they can,'' the opening gambit of an administration strategy to demonstrate that Saddam Hussein will seek to undermine today's resolution.

A key element of that strategy, as described today by administration officials, is to lure defectors from Mr. Hussein's weapons programs with promises that in return for their testimony, they will not have to return to Iraq under the current government. Their knowledge of where weapons and research facilities are located, officials hope, would provide Washington with the evidence to challenge the list of weapons sites and research facilities that Mr. Hussein is required to produce in 30 days.

The second element of the strategy, officials said, is to funnel American intelligence on scores of sites to Hans Blix, the chief United Nations weapons inspector. The American list begins with sites that Mr. Hussein is believed to consider his most sensitive.

''The key to the next few months is getting a couple of good defectors,'' one senior administration official said today. ''That's why we put in the perjury clause.'' That provision in the Security Council resolution stipulates that any omission from Mr. Hussein's list would itself constitute a ''material breach,'' and give Mr. Bush the basis for military action.

White House officials said today they were fairly confident that Mr. Hussein would attempt to undermine the inspections sooner or later. Their plan, which they make little effort to conceal, is to force him into a misstep -- one that would be obvious to the Security Council -- as early as possible.

Within hours of the vote on disarmament, one senior administration official made it clear that Mr. Hussein might still be tried for war crimes even if he complies fully with the United Nations inspections. Those charges would be brought under other United Nations resolutions dealing with the gassing of the Kurds.

But in briefing reporters today, senior administration officials sent slightly conflicting signals about what kind of interference with the inspectors would provide evidence of a continuing ''material breach'' of the United Nations resolutions.

One official deeply involved in the negotiations at the United Nations said today at the White House that the administration would look for ''a pattern of noncompliance,'' adding that ''the United States is not poised looking for the first comma out of place.''

Some conservatives have criticized the new resolution, saying it still allows Mr. Hussein too much leeway to obstruct inspections and requires Mr. Bush to consult with the Security Council before taking military action. Perhaps aware of that criticism, another administration official insisted that Mr. Hussein would not be able to wriggle out. ''The United States believes that after all Saddam has done, we have to have a zero-tolerance view,'' the official said.

''We will know rather quickly whether or not they are cooperating,'' said one of the officials. ''We're not going to sit back and wait until we see day after day, week after week of violations.''

Their description of the next phase of the White House strategy to force disarmament came after a small celebration in the Oval Office around 10:40 this morning. Reporters waiting in the Rose Garden for Mr. Bush could see him smiling at stories being told by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell.

Earlier this morning it was Mr. Powell who had called the White House, only moments before the Security Council vote, to tell Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, that Syria decided at the last minute to vote for the resolution.

Today, Mr. Bush also seemed to begin to mend fences with the chancellor of Germany, Gerhard Schröder, who won re-election recently by vowing that Germany would not join a coalition confrontation with Iraq, and openly splitting from Washington. He was snubbed for weeks by the Bush administration, but today Mr. Bush spoke with him.

And at the Pentagon, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld met with his German counterpart, Peter Struck, and then wryly noted an improvement in ties between the two nations.

''Unpoisoned,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said with a smile when asked to describe the countries' relations.

The two defense ministers said they discussed the Security Council vote and its implications, the broader campaign against global terror and German plans to join the Netherlands in commanding the International Security Assistance Force of foreign peacekeepers in Afghanistan.

Mr. Bush's appeal to Iraq's scientists and others with knowledge of the country's weapons of mass destruction came only a day after he warned Iraqi generals not to follow orders to use chemical or biological weapons, suggesting they would face trial. But today's appeal seemed intended to both encourage a coup and to flush out, as fast as possible, any efforts to deceive the inspection team.

''All patriotic Iraqis should embrace this resolution as an opportunity for Iraq to avoid war and end its isolation,'' Mr. Bush said when he stepped into the sunshine. ''Saddam Hussein cannot hide his weapons of mass destruction from international inspectors without the cooperation of hundreds and thousands of Iraqis.'' Then he added: ''By helping the process of disarmament, they help their country.''

Mr. Bush sounded stern today, but his aides seemed almost buoyant. Just weeks ago they had been talking about whether France, Russia or China would abstain from the resolution, or veto it. They spoke of trying to gather 9 votes out of 15.

So this morning, even Mr. Powell seemed a bit surprised that the vote was unanimous, though White House officials would not say what kind of guarantees -- if any -- were given to Syria about its security during a conflict or to Russia about the $7.6 billion it says it is owed by Iraq.

''I think Syria just ultimately saw where their interests were in this matter,'' one of the senior officials said.
