

THREATS AND RESPONSES: EUROPE; Blair Tries to Sell a Military Solution for Iraq, but Chirac Won't Buy It
By Craig S. Smith
Feb. 5, 2003

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, Washington's staunchest ally and the greatest European champion of an eventual war with Iraq, failed today to persuade President Jacques Chirac of France to endorse military action through the United Nations Security Council.

Meeting Mr. Chirac a day before Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was to lay out Washington's case against Iraq at the United Nations, Mr. Blair did not get the backing he needed for a second Security Council resolution that would explicitly endorse war. The British prime minister, like other European leaders, faces mounting opposition at home to any military action.

His effort was part of an elaborate and quickening diplomatic minuet among leaders from America, Europe and the Arab world as war appears increasingly likely.

The American defense secretary, Donald H. Rumsfeld, arrives in Munich late this week to explain the American position to an annual gathering of military and foreign policy officials and experts. The Spanish prime minister, José María Aznar, a strong supporter of President Bush's position on Iraq, is expected to lobby his German counterpart, Gerhard Schröder, at a summit meeting next week.

Much of the effort has focused on Russia and France, permanent members of the Security Council with the power to veto resolutions. Both countries have resisted American and British pressure to declare Saddam Hussein's government in breach of last year's United Nations resolution demanding that he disarm. Such a breach would provide the United States with the legal basis to go to war.

Mr. Bush called President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on the two nations' hot line today to share ''the main American assessments of Baghdad's actions in the disarmament sphere,'' the Kremlin said in a statement released this evening. The statement said Mr. Putin had stressed the need for United Nations arms inspectors to play a crucial role in future decisions about action against Iraq. It added that the two leaders agreed to continue discussions with Security Council members on the need for further action.

On Sunday and Monday, Mr. Putin will meet first with Mr. Schröder and then with Mr. Chirac, both of whom support continued weapons inspections. Earlier this week, Mr. Putin received one of Mr. Bush's closest European allies, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy, who was in Washington last week.

George Papandreou, the foreign minister of Greece, which currently holds the presidency of the European Union, worked the telephones during the day to put together a European Union summit meeting later this month that would try to reach a consensus on Iraq. Europe's fragile unity fractured last week when eight leaders, including Mr. Blair, issued a letter supporting Mr. Bush's stance and tacitly criticizing Germany and France.

Meanwhile, in Kiev, Ukraine's president, Leonid D. Kuchma, committed his nation to send a battalion of chemical, germ and radiation-warfare specialists to Iraq should the United Nations approve military action against Baghdad. ''If there is a threat coming from Iraq, the reaction of the international community should be adequate to this threat, and Ukraine will be involved,'' Mr. Kuchma said.

Mr. Kuchma has suffered strong criticism from the United States and NATO members since this autumn, when a United States analysis of clandestine tape recordings concluded that he had authorized underlings to smuggle a sophisticated air-defense system to Iraq. Mr. Kuchma has denied the accusation.

Even Saddam Hussein has joined the dance. In an interview broadcast this evening in Britain with Tony Benn, a veteran British left-wing politician, he denied what is expected to be one of Mr. Powell's principal charges -- that Iraq has ties to Al Qaeda.

Not all of the efforts are fruitful, as Mr. Blair discovered in France today.

Mr. Blair had come to this blustery seaside resort in hopes of closing the gap between France and the United States.

But Mr. Chirac, speaking after the meeting with Mr. Blair, said he would ''consider'' evidence of Iraq's weapons programs to be presented on Wednesday to the Security Council by Mr. Powell, but would wait until United Nation's weapons inspectors give their next report on Feb. 14 before making any decisions on future action.

Weeks of Hectic Diplomacy

Tuesday, Feb. 4

Le Touquet, France -- Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain meets President Jacques Chirac of France.

Washington -- President Bush calls President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

Washington -- Defense Minister Donald H. Rumsfeld meets King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa of Bahrain.

New York -- Secretary of State Colin L. Powell meets with China's foreign minister, Tang Jiaxuan.

Beirut, Lebanon -- George Papandreou, the foreign minister of Greece, which holds the European Union presidency, works to organize a special European summit meeting and meets with Lebanese foreign minister, Mahmoud Hammoud.

Wednesday, Feb. 5

Washington -- Mr. Bush to meet Prime Minister Leszek Miller of Poland.

New York -- Mr. Powell to present evidence to the Security Council and meets separately with foreign ministers of Council member countries.

Thursday, Feb. 6

Ankara, Turkey -- Turkish Parliament to vote on whether to allow American teams to begin upgrading Turkish military bases.

Feb. 7-9

Munich -- Mr. Rumsfeld to attend security conference.

Saturday, Feb. 8

Baghdad, Iraq -- The chief weapons inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, arrive in Iraq for two-day visit.

Sunday, Feb. 9

Berlin -- Mr. Putin to talk with Chancellor Gerhard Schröder.

Monday, Feb. 10

Canary Islands -- Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain to meet Chancellor Schröder.

France -- Mr. Putin to begin two-day visit.

Washington -- Prime Minister John Howard of Australia to meet Mr. Bush before meeting Kofi Annan.

Friday, Feb. 14

New York -- Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei to brief Security Council.

Mid-February --

March 1

New York -- Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei to brief Security Council.

Cairo -- Meeting of Arab League leaders (tentative).

