

The World; Iran Looks at a War With Iraq and Sees Its Own
By Elaine Sciolino
Feb. 2, 2003

AS Iranians contemplate an American-led war against Iraq, they have been forced to confront a demon from their past: their own war with Iraq never ended, either legally or psychologically. So it is profoundly disconcerting for Iranians to anticipate that their archenemy, the United States, may bring down Saddam Hussein after they could not.

Fifteen years after the fighting stopped, Iran and Iraq have a cease-fire but no peace treaty or border demarcation. Both still hold prisoners of war. Iraq restricts Iranian pilgrims' visits to Najaf and Kerbala, the holiest shrines in Shiite Islam. And Iran has held on to Iraqi warplanes that Mr. Hussein sent for safekeeping while he fought to keep Kuwait in 1991. (He had the misimpression that Iran would send them back.)

More seriously, the psychological wounds have not healed. The war was fought largely on Iranian soil, sometimes with poison gas, and 16 of Iran's 24 provinces became targets of Iraqi bombs and missiles. The war crushed Iran's economy, sent legions of teenage ''martyrs'' to their deaths, killed at least 300,000 Iranians and wounded from 600,000 to 750,000.

From 1980, when Saddam Hussein attacked Iran, to 1988, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the father of Iran's revolution, told his soldiers that theirs was a holy war between Islam and blasphemy that would not end until Iraq too was an Islamic republic.

Then, one day in 1988, Tehran radio read a statement in the ayatollah's name stating that he would submit to God's will and accept a United Nations peace plan -- a decision, the statement said, that ''was more deadly than taking poison.''

The announcement was so sudden that officials did not have time to remove the war banners and paintings in every city and town. Ayatollah Khomeini promised to explain one day why he had made the decision, but he died first; his people still wonder.

That disconnect has prevented the wounds from healing and left a sense of unfinished business. ''We haven't solved a single problem that we have with Saddam's regime,'' said Sadegh Zibakalam, a political scientist.

There is also a sense of betrayal; people wonder about the value of wartime sacrifice itself. ''The words of that broadcast were so empty,'' said an Iranian government official, who heard the statement at a prison camp in northern Iraq. ''All the soldiers cried. We cried so hard that even the Iraqi soldier watching us from the window cried with us.''

The official, who endured beatings and electric shock from his Iraqi jailers, was not released until two years after the truce. And he, like many Iranians, was left with a deep ambivalence about the war's meaning. ''I feel proud that I was able to defend my country,'' he said, ''even if I have been cheated.''

In that sentiment is a clue to how difficult it is now for Iranians, and for their ruling clerics, to face the prospect that the United States, the Great Satan they grew up with, will oust the tyrant that their holy war could not defeat.

In fact, Iranians of all classes express terror, not simply at the prospect of an American military presence on their border, but at the likelihood of renewed warfare itself. In particular they fear that Mr. Hussein might lash out at Iran just to keep it from benefiting from the war, in much the same way he set Kuwait's oil fields afire when his armies retreated in 1991.

Iran has already begun to build makeshift shelters on the border to house what it expects to be an influx of hundreds of thousands of refugees. They have experience with that kind of suffering too: the Soviet sweep into Afghanistan sent nearly two million Afghan refugees fleeing into Iran, bringing with them drugs, crime and unemployment in the same years that Iran was battling Iraq.

Iran itself is not prepared to mobilize, and no one is talking seriously here of asking a new generation to make sacrifices, should war come again. The population, many Iranians say, would simply not tolerate it.

''My father was a revolutionary and spent the best years of his life from the age of 21 to 29 in war zones,'' said Amin Bozorgian, a 21-year-old student activist. ''He was wounded by chemical weapons and has serious lung problems. He never talks about it. I feel like the bombs of the chemical weapons burst in our lives, and they keep on bursting. The government dragged a war that could have ended in two years into eight years. We're all somehow damaged by that war. And all the war talk now is like picking a scab and opening a wound.''

Such feelings are widespread even though they run counter to the official view of the Islamic republic. For years after the war, the government campaigned to keep alive the cult of martyrdom and sacrifice, and even today the war is portrayed as an honorable effort. The Martyrs' Foundation, which gives subsidies to disabled veterans and the families of the war dead, continues to hang huge paintings of war heroes on main thoroughfares of cities, often near commercial billboards.

The United States has sent assurances to the Iranians through private channels that the installation of an American-led government in Baghdad is not part of a larger plot to encircle them, though some American analysts have said that the removal of Saddam Hussein would boost democratic forces in Iran.

On the other hand, some hard-liners here expect that the specter of attack from American forces next door might be the one thing that could unite Iran again against an external enemy.

''We know that if America attacks, all the divisions in Iran will disappear,'' said Amir Mohebian, political editor of the conservative newspaper Resalaat. ''You will see that after the first bullet the reformers will chant the most radical slogans against America. And politically, this would not be to our disadvantage.''
