

A NATION AT WAR: THE IRAQI LEADER; Dead or Alive? U.S. Intelligence Officials Say Hussein's Fate Is Still Unknown
By James Risen
March 31, 2003

Nearly two weeks into the war with Iraq, United States government officials say they are still uncertain whether the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, is alive or dead, and they say they have not yet been able to definitively identify who in Baghdad is in overall command of Iraqi military forces.

The officials said in interviews that they were now certain that Mr. Hussein was in the leadership bunker on March 19, the opening night of the campaign, at the time that it was targeted by cruise missiles and bunker-busting bombs. They also said they believed that several other important members of Mr. Hussein's inner circle were with him then.

Until today, the officials had said only that they believed he had been there that day, but were not sure whether he was in the building at the time of the attack.

On a television program today, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld once again raised the possibility that Mr. Hussein was killed in the bombing raid on the first night of the war, and referred to unconfirmed reports that members of his family -- including his first wife, the mother of his two sons -- had begun to flee, as a sign of growing desperation within the Iraqi leadership.

While Mr. Rumsfeld said he did not know for sure whether Mr. Hussein was still alive, he said that uncertainty over his fate was likely to have a dispiriting effect on Iraqis still loyal to him. ''They have seen an attack on their leadership, and we have not seen their leadership since,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said during an appearance on ''Fox News Sunday.''

''Where is Saddam Hussein? Where is Qusay? Where is Uday -- his sons? They're not talking,'' Mr. Rumsfeld added.

''The families of some of the leaders seem to be fleeing the country,'' he said. ''I think the Iraqi people have to have a sense that things are not going terribly well.''

It was unclear whether Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks reflected renewed hope within the Bush administration that Mr. Hussein was dead. Top government officials said his statements might also be part of a strategy to convince the Iraqi people that their leaders are gone or to bait Mr. Hussein and his sons into proving they are alive.

Since the war began, the Pentagon and the C.I.A. have been unable to find conclusive evidence that the Iraqi leader had died in the raid. They have also not identified any other leaders who might have been killed at the same time.

Immediately after the raid, a videotape of Mr. Hussein addressing the Iraqi people appeared on state-run television, and several other tapes have appeared since. Today, Iraqi state television reported that Mr. Hussein had met with his top officials, including his son Qusay and the deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz.

American analysts say that the man on the tapes is Mr. Hussein, rather than a double, but they are unsure when the tapes were made.

''They don't look legitimate to me,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said today.

Since March 19, the coalition led by the United States has launched repeated bombing raids against the Iraqi leadership, and C.I.A. and Special Forces units are believed to be hunting for Mr. Hussein's lieutenants. But American intelligence officers have not been able to identify any member of Mr. Hussein's inner circle who may have been killed so far in the war, government officials said today. They noted that Mr. Hussein's two sons, who control many elements of Iraqi security, have not been seen since the war began.

American intelligence officials said they believed that if he did survive the raid, Mr. Hussein had gone to ground, hiding much as he did during the 1991 Persian Gulf war, when American bombing raids repeatedly failed to kill him.

American intelligence officials said they had not been able to determine who in the government was coordinating and commanding Iraqi forces. They also said they had not received any evidence that Mr. Hussein or his sons were issuing orders, although they could be doing so.

''I will say this: I have not seen credible evidence over the last period of days since we started this operation that this regime is being controlled by the top, as we understand the top,'' Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the chief of the United States Central Command, which is directing the war, said at a news briefing today.

The intelligence officials said they believed that Baghdad was still able to coordinate military operations to some degree, despite the extensive damage to the Iraqi communications systems inflicted by repeated bombing raids. The Iraqis seemed to be relying both on basic communications methods, like couriers, and highly advanced communications, including land lines that had not yet been cut or tapped by American military or intelligence operatives.

Mr. Rumsfeld and other government officials said the reports that some Hussein family members had begun to try to leave Baghdad could be a sign that the leadership was beginning to crack. The officials said there had been unconfirmed rumors out of Iraq that Mr. Hussein's first wife had left Baghdad, although they said they had not seen any evidence to support news reports that she had tried to make her way to Syria.

Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammad Al-Douri, appearing today on American television, did not shed any light when asked about Mr. Hussein's status.

Asked on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' why Mr. Hussein had not appeared publicly, he said, ''You know, anyway, I think he's alive.''

Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who appeared on the same show, noted the ambassador's reluctance to answer the question, adding: ''We have not seen the leader, Saddam Hussein, alive. He's always been recorded. And so I think there is some question in lots of people's minds: Is their leader alive or is he severely injured, or is he possibly dead?''
