

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ARAB ALLIES; Jordan Could Suffer From U.S. Assault on Iraq
By Jane Perlez
Sept. 15, 2002

Of the United States' allies in the Arab world, Jordan, wedged between Iraq to its northeast and Israel to its west, stands to suffer the most from an American attack on Baghdad, diplomats in the region say.

King Abdullah II and his advisers are asking the Bush administration for assurances, including not using Jordan as a base from which to strike Iraq. Jordan is also asking for help to secure a flow of oil, which the country now buys at preferential prices from Iraq, officials said.

Another important request is for Washington to ensure that Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, does not take advantage of a war to push Palestinians from the West Bank into Jordan, they said.

The king, who upset the Bush administration in July when he said that an attack on Iraq was a ''ludicrous'' idea, has accepted the inevitability of war, officials here said.

In a televised speech to the nation last month, the king signaled the likelihood of war when he put the onus for a peaceful outcome on Baghdad, saying it was up to Iraq's leaders to resolve the issue through dialogue rather than force.

The king is now focusing his efforts on seeking to get the best possible protection for Jordan's interests, diplomats said.

These efforts consist of balancing Jordan's historic ties to Iraq with its increasingly strong economic and military ties to the United States. While Jordan's late King Hussein, the current monarch's father, stayed out of the international coalition against Baghdad in the 1991 Persian Gulf war, officials here say King Abdullah is unlikely to do the same. Also, Jordan signed a peace treaty with Israel in 1994, a further shift toward the American camp.

In recognition of Jordan's vulnerability, the United States would probably try to avoid using bases in Jordan, diplomats said.

One fear here is that Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, would target Jordan with chemical weapons if it served as a military platform for the United States in time of war.

American troops are not stationed in Jordan, and the government has gone out of its way to emphasize that American troops who took part in joint exercises here last month had left the country. Foreign Minister Marwan Muasher has repeatedly said that Jordanian bases, which would give American forces easy access to western Iraq, would not be used for an attack.

However, there is no formal agreement ruling out American use of the bases during a war, Western officials said. If the American military decided that Jordan was critical to victory, King Abdullah would have little choice but to agree, Jordanian analysts said.

But one Western diplomat in the region said the Bush administration ''understands the balancing act'' that Jordan must maintain. The United States was ''not asking the Jordanians to do things they can't do,'' the diplomat said. Another said the administration was telling Jordan: ''We will never let Jordan down.''

There was no detailed explanation of how the United States might guarantee Jordan adequate oil, but oil experts said there had been discussions of refurbishing the pipeline between Saudi Arabia and Jordan, which has been closed since the gulf war.

''The most logical source is Saudi Arabia,'' said Raad Alkadiri, an analyst for the Petroleum Finance Company in Washington.

So far, the Saudis have declined to grant Jordan oil at preferential rates, Mr. Alkadiri said. But a Western diplomat said that Jordan's healthy foreign reserves, of about $2.8 billion, would allow it to buy enough oil to get through a short war.

One of the biggest worries here is that a war with Iraq would deflect attention from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and remove restraints on Prime Minister Sharon.

''The concern is that Sharon will push Palestinians over the border from the West Bank in order to increase the Jewishness of the West Bank,'' said Mustafa B. Hamarneh, director for the Center for Strategic Studies at the University of Jordan.

He predicted that Jordan would try to use its treaty with Israel, an important element in American interests in the region, as a bargaining position with the Bush administration to keep Mr. Sharon in check.

The ethnic balance in Jordan is delicate. By some estimates, more than half the country's five million people are Palestinians, and as many as 400,000 are Iraqis. The influx of many more Palestinians and Iraqis during an unpopular war could be highly destabilizing for the monarchy.

In a background session with Jordanian reporters recently, the king declared that he would use troops to prevent Palestinians from being pushed into Jordan from the West Bank, one of the participants in the meeting said.

Jordan is also concerned that Iraqi refugees would pour in once a war started. Information Minister Muhammad al-Adwan told reporters here that Jordan was determined to ''protect its borders'' and suggested that the army would be used in the north, too, to deter refugees.

Describing the Jordanian dilemma, Mr. Adwan said: ''Iraq is a neighboring Arab country. We have brotherhood ties and geographical and commercial interests.''

At the same time, he said: ''We are an ally of the United States. We have ties, very important commercial interests and political ones'' with the United States. Last year, for example, the United States signed a free-trade agreement with Jordan, and Jordan's textile exports have jumped to $450 million, compared with $39 million three years ago.

Despite all the negatives the Jordanians fear in the event of war -- including the possible breakup of Iraq -- some analysts also see some advantages.

A post-Saddam Hussein, American-controlled Iraq could be the source of plentiful and cheap oil for Jordan, said Rob Malley, the director of Middle East affairs for the International Crisis Group, and a member of President Bill Clinton's National Security Council.

A pro-American Iraq would provide a big market for Jordan, not to mention riches to be reaped from the reconstruction of Baghdad, he said.
