

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Many at U.N. Seek Evidence For U.S. Case Against Iraq
By Julia Preston
Sept. 9, 2002

In the diplomatic scramble before President Bush's address to the General Assembly on Thursday to explain why the United States is moving toward a military strike against Iraq, the key issues for the United Nations are what weapons Baghdad is developing and how fast.

Despite a largely negative initial reaction to the Bush administration's stepped-up barrage of words directed against President Saddam Hussein in the last week, diplomats say there is broad agreement here that Baghdad has long been brazenly out of compliance with Security Council resolutions, including the armistice that ended the Persian Gulf war of 1991.

If Mr. Bush makes a strong, detailed case that Mr. Hussein has vigorously reactivated programs to make biological, chemical and especially nuclear weapons since United Nations inspectors were last in Iraq in December 1998, many nations will be willing to listen, diplomats said.

But a number of countries, including some major allies of the United States, are balking at the way the administration has pitched its argument so far. They were taken by surprise by American officials' assertions in recent days that Mr. Hussein had suddenly become so dangerous that he must be quickly toppled.

Security Council members bridled at Vice President Dick Cheney's suggestion that a return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq would be a waste of precious time.

In the background is the Bush administration's policy of ''regime change.'' The notion is anathema to many at the United Nations, who see it as smacking of the American arrogance of the cold war, when Washington sponsored coups to unseat governments it did not like.

Respect for the sovereignty of other nations, even the less savory ones, is a core operating principle of the world organization.

The administration policy ''collides with the role of the United Nations,'' said a senior diplomat from a Security Council member that could be an important swing vote. But he added that he was open to hearing Mr. Bush's arguments.

''The United States does not have a weak case,'' the diplomat said. ''But the United States first has to prove its case, that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction and the intention to use them in an imminent attack.''

The urgency of the need for action against Mr. Hussein is a matter dividing many nations from Washington. If Mr. Bush shows evidence that Iraq is working busily to build a nuclear weapon and is becoming an immediate danger, quite a few nations might consider supporting military action against him.

But many countries are concerned that the Bush administration wants to drag them into a first strike against Baghdad on the vaguer ground that Mr. Hussein might become a nuclear threat some time in the future.

That would be a major revision of a doctrine of pre-emptive first strike that is familiar in diplomacy, experts say. If the administration is proposing ''prevention of a remote threat, rather than an imminent threat, this is new,'' said Joseph S. Nye Jr., the dean of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University and a former assistant secretary of defense.

Diplomats fear that if the administration fails to demonstrate that the weapons threat from Iraq is immediate, it may provide a justification for countries locked in all kinds of prickly disputes to attack their adversaries. They note that Mr. Hussein himself might seize on the administration's argument for attacking him to justify a pre-emptive strike in self-defense against the United States or a third country.

As a result, several Security Council members have openly opposed that strategy. Russia, a permanent, veto-bearing member of the Security Council, argues that Mr. Hussein should be given positive incentives. Russia has suggested a resolution that would make it easier for Iraq to reach compliance and achieve the lifting of tough sanctions. But diplomats said Russia could not ignore persuasive evidence from Washington about the possibility of nuclear weapons in Iraq.

In the last year, much of the good will the the United States enjoyed at the United Nations after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks has eroded. The administration has had running clashes in the organization over the Kyoto treaty on global warming. Delegates from 78 countries have been meeting here for a week to forge operating procedures for the International Criminal Court, which the Bush administration opposes.

Presiding over the gathering on the international court is Prince Zeid bin Raad, the ambassador from Jordan, a country whose help could be valuable to the United States in a military assault on Iraq.

He and delegates from Canada and the European Union, American allies that strongly support the court, have been struggling to give it international legitimacy in the face of efforts to curb its jurisdiction by the world's remaining superpower.

Against the backdrop of those tensions, some diplomats are irritated that Mr. Bush seems to be coming to the United Nations to present a decision to strike Mr. Hussein, rather than an effort to garner support for an operation if necessary.

''You don't have to go to the United Nations to ask to authorize military action,'' David Hannay, Britain's ambassador here during the gulf war, said by telephone from London. ''You can go there to marshal as broad a coalition as you can.'' For many European allies, he said, it is particularly important to see that Washington is not snubbing the United Nations.

Security Council diplomats also argued that the administration had been too hasty to dismiss the work of United Nations weapons inspectors. If Mr. Hussein permits the inspectors to return, the diplomats said, their mere presence will force him to focus on concealing his weapons programs, significantly slowing his progress. If he should continue to refuse to allow them in, they said, he would be in such obvious violation of Council resolutions that it would be hard for most nations not to support military action.
