

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTIONS; 70 U.N. Arms Monitors Extend Scope of Searches Into the Iraqi Desert
By John F. Burns
Dec. 12, 2002

Teams of United Nations weapons inspectors began their third week of surprise visits to Iraqi industrial and scientific sites today in a mood of growing confidence that they can counter doubts voiced by senior Bush administration officials about their work.

In the first week after they started work on Nov. 27, the inspectors made two or three site visits a day. They have now stepped up the pace, visiting eight sites today. On Tuesday, their busiest day so far, they went to 13. After initially rarely ranging more than 100 miles from Baghdad, and mostly much less, they have begun long-distance probes hundreds of miles into the Iraqi desert.

From an initial group of 17 inspectors, there are now more than 70 experts in nuclear, biological and chemical warfare, as well as missile experts; by Christmas, this number is expected to rise to nearly 100.

Setting out early each morning, the inspectors set course for some of the 900 ''declared'' sites on their checklists, meaning sites where Iraq has conducted weapons work in the past, or has laboratories or plants with ''dual use'' capabilities that could be turned from civilian purposes to weapons-related work.

With foreign reporters following them on every inspection, the United Nations teams have covered a wide range of installations representing all the major weapons programs Iraq had under way in the 1990's, when its defeat in the Persian Gulf war led the Security Council to impose a wide-ranging ban on Iraq's possession or development of weapons of mass destruction.

Among these sites have been the principal centers of Iraqi work on nuclear weapons, on deadly biological toxins like botulinum and anthrax, and on chemical weapons like VX gas.

The scattered irregularities found so far -- mostly involving the unnotified transfer of equipment monitored by earlier groups of inspectors in the 1990's -- have almost all been quickly resolved. Iraqi officials and scientists have identified other sites to which the parts have been moved, allowing the inspectors to confirm, in most cases, that the equipment is at the new locations.

The byword of United Nations officials who have briefed reporters, in Baghdad and by telephone from New York, has been caution, with the officials saying the inspectors, and experts outside Iraq, need time to determine whether there is any evidence that Iraq has resumed work on banned weapons programs, as the Bush administration has alleged.

''We haven't disclosed anything, but that doesn't mean that we haven't found any trace of evidence to suggest to our inspectors that there may be something'' that indicates new Iraqi work on banned weapons, one United Nations official with access to inspectors' reports said. ''It's just that we cannot tell you anything yet.''

The deadline for an initial report to the Security Council by the chiefs of the two separate inspection teams is Jan. 25. That is 60 days from the start of work by the teams from the New York-based United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission -- or Unmovic -- responsible for checking biological, chemical and missile sites, and the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, which is charged with checking nuclear sites.

Yasuhiro Ueki, spokesman for the two teams in Baghdad, said this was likely to be the first occasion for public disclosure of findings, unless Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei -- the heads of the two inspection teams -- ''feel they have something they need to say before that.''

United Nations officials who have spoken to reporters about the inspections have been sensitive to criticisms from Washington.

These have followed on from the policy split of last summer, when hawks in the administration were deeply reluctant to enmesh American policy on Iraq with a resumption of United Nations weapons inspections. Since inspections started, some senior officials in Washington have implied that the program could quickly founder in a morass of Iraqi harassment and deceit, accompanied by United Nations indecisiveness, as happened in the 1990's.

The critical American officials have called for the new round of inspections to be rapidly intensified, and for the United Nations teams to use the full range of powers written into the tough new inspections mandate approved by the Security Council on Nov. 8.

A number of these powers, like the right to swoop down on sites across Iraq in helicopters and the power to fly Iraqi scientists and their families outside Iraq for questioning, have not been invoked so far. Others, like the right to ''freeze'' inspection sites and prevent movement of people or materials in or out during the inspections, have been imposed, as far as accompanying reporters have been able to determine, with a wide latitude for the Iraqis.

United Nations officials in Baghdad say their ability to surprise the Iraqis, and their need to, will come together in the weeks ahead as weapons experts complete their analysis of the 12,000-page Iraqi weapons declaration delivered last weekend, and as helicopters become available to the inspection teams.

So far, 34 days after the new weapons inspection mandate was approved by the Security Council, only one United Nations helicopter has reached Baghdad, a transfer from the United Nations administration in Kosovo.

Mr. Ueki said contracts for more helicopters, to total about six, were ''in the final stage of the bidding process'' with private companies that charter aircraft to the United Nations. He was unable to say when they would arrive.

An example of the handicaps facing the inspectors came on Tuesday, when a team of nuclear inspectors set out on a 240-mile trip across the desert to a phosphate complex at Al Qaim, on the Syrian border, where the Iraqis produced about 100 tons of uranium as a byproduct in the 1980's.

The desert journey of more than five hours would have allowed accompanying Iraqi officials to alert the complex by radio that an inspection was imminent.
