

AIR POWER ALONE CAN'T DEFEAT IRAQ, RUMSFELD ASSERTS
By Eric Schmitt and James Dao
July 31, 2002

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said today that Iraq now has mobile biological-weapons laboratories that would be very difficult to bomb, an example, he said, of why air power alone would not destroy all of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.

Even if Iraq ultimately agreed to allow international inspectors back into the country, President Saddam Hussein has taken such steps to conceal his weapons program that inspections would be ineffective, Mr. Rumsfeld said at a news conference this afternoon.

He added that many of the sites are buried deep underground and that weapons are produced in factories that also make legitimate commercial products.

His remarks were the most extensive he has offered on the challenges facing the Pentagon in planning to unseat President Hussein and eliminate his arsenal, though he also made it clear that the administration had not settled on a specific plan.

In recent weeks Mr. Rumsfeld has stepped up his campaign to warn of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, a strategy that some military and other officials say is meant to begin laying the groundwork for a war with Iraq, if President Bush makes that decision.

Under repeated questioning, Mr. Rumsfeld stopped short of saying the administration had little option but to invade Iraq with ground troops. But other military officials said today that short of a coup, that may be the only sure way to topple Mr. Hussein and eliminate Iraq's weapons. In fact, within the Pentagon, senior officers are engaged in active debate over whether ground troops should be used -- and if so, how many, and how they would be deployed.

Senate hearings on Iraq begin on Wednesday, with experts on Iraq from outside the administration to testify before the Foreign Relations Committee.

One witness, Gen. Joseph Hoar, a retired head of the Central Command, expressed wariness about using military force to oust Mr. Hussein before all diplomatic and economic avenues were exhausted. ''It can be done,'' General Hoar said in a telephone interview tonight. ''But the risk is, how many lives will be lost?''

A growing number of lawmakers from both parties are voicing concern that the administration is heading precipitously toward war. Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who is chairman of the committee, told reporters today that administration officials had assured him that they would not begin an attack this fall and were still considering a range of options.

But each of those options has drawbacks. Mr. Rumsfeld and his deputy, Paul D. Wolfowitz, have repeatedly scorned the idea of pressing for the resumption of the international inspections, which Mr. Hussein barred in 1998.

Senator Biden, however, said resuming the inspections could slow Baghdad's weapons production and build international support for additional measures against Iraq.

Many intelligence analysts say it is unlikely that a coup would succeed, noting that at least six attempts failed in the 1990's.

The current policy of containing Iraq has many supporters in the military and the State Department. But other senior administration officials argue that even with the constraints, it is only a matter of time before Mr. Hussein develops the weapons and the means to launch them -- or provides them to terrorist groups.

Various strategies remain under consideration. One is an attack on Baghdad and other command centers in an effort to cause a quick collapse of the government; another is an all-out air and land war, involving as many as 250,000 troops.

Asked today about the choices, Mr. Rumsfeld said, ''We don't talk about specific plans.''

Several Mideast allies have warned the administration against an attack. King Abdullah II of Jordan is to meet with Mr. Bush on Thursday, probably to voice concern about hawkish officials pressing for action.

In Baghdad today, Mr. Hussein dismissed as a ''tall story'' assertions by American and British leaders that Iraq was again well on the way to developing weapons of mass destruction.

But in the past few weeks, Mr. Rumsfeld has been briefing lawmakers, NATO allies and former defense secretaries on the threat posed by countries, including Iraq, that the United States believes have biological, chemical or nuclear capacities. In the briefings, participants said, Mr. Rumsfeld explained how state-sponsored weapons programs are proceeding menacingly, while terrorist groups are becoming more sophisticated in their efforts to obtain such weapons.

In the briefings, Mr. Rumsfeld has not taken the next step -- to say the United States and its allies should use military force to eliminate this threat. But some participants said that was the impression he left.

And while, in the briefings, Mr. Rumsfeld mentions other countries of concern, including North Korea and Syria, in his public comments he has singled out Iraq.

''They have chemical weapons and biological weapons, and they have an appetite for nuclear weapons and have been working on them for a good many years, and there's an awful lot we don't know about their programs,'' he said today.

He also explained why he believed weapons inspections would be ineffective, saying, ''It would take such a thoroughly intrusive inspection regime, agreed to and then lived up to by Iraq, that it's difficult to comprehend -- even begin to think -- that they might accept such a regime.''

Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks built on comments he made on Monday during a brief news conference at the United States Joint Forces Command in Suffolk, Va., where he was asked why the United States did not just bomb Iraq's weapons sites.

''The idea that it's easy to simply go do what you suggested ought to be done from the air, the implication being from the air, is a misunderstanding of the situation,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''The Iraqis have a great deal of what they do deeply buried.''

Mr. Rumsfeld added today, ''They move around a lot of things to avoid detection or if not detection, at least to avoid having them attacked.''