

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SEEKING SUPPORT; Bush Lobbies Putin to Back U.S. Action Against Iraq But Still Meets Resistance
By Elisabeth Bumiller and James Dao
Sept. 21, 2002

Administration officials said today that they were encouraged by a telephone conversation that President Bush had with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia seeking support for American action against Saddam Hussein, and that differences between the governments over Iraq were exaggerated.

The Kremlin countered that Mr. Putin stood firm against a move on Iraq and that his priority was still to send United Nations arms inspectors back to Baghdad, which the Bush administration's most hawkish members consider a waste of time.

The dueling accounts came after the half-hour telephone call between the leaders this morning and a 20-minute Oval Office meeting later between Mr. Bush and Russia's foreign and defense ministers. The administration's public statements of optimism were echoed by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, who said his own meetings with the ministers had been productive.

''We recommitted ourselves to finding a way forward that would bring Iraq into compliance, and I think they're open to hear our arguments and we're open to hear their arguments,'' Secretary Powell told reporters outside the State Department. ''And so the split that has been much spoken about earlier this week I don't think is quite the split that people have portrayed.''

Although the Kremlin said in a statement that Mr. Putin was adamant about the return of the inspectors, senior administration officials indicated that the Russians were less resistant to war with Iraq in private than they were in public.

''As this evolves,'' a senior administration official said, ''it's becoming clear that the Russians are not going to be the problem, that the Russians are willing to be agnostic on a whole host of issues. It sounds as if they're resigned that this is going to play itself out in a military confrontation, and they're just more concerned in having what they see as an appropriate role -- political, economic, whatever -- in a post-Saddam Iraq.''

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Putin has strongly supported Mr. Bush's campaign against terrorism, even as he has kept close economic ties with Iraq. The two leaders have what Mr. Bush describes as a close personal bond, but Mr. Putin also faces continuing political pressure in Moscow not to be seen as merely a docile supporter of the White House.

The administration continued its diplomatic offensive on multiple fronts for fast action on Iraq.

At the White House, officials formally released the first comprehensive rationale for pre-emptive strikes against nations that aggressively develop biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, and made the argument that the United States had to remain the world's unchallenged military power.

On Capitol Hill, White House officials met with Congressional leaders to begin talks on the wording of a White House resolution seeking Congress's approval to oust Mr. Hussein. But some lawmakers said the document represented an overly broad grant of power to the president and would allow him to wage war throughout the Middle East.

''The resolution is a direct insult and an affront to the powers given to Congress on matters of war under the Constitution,'' said Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia.

The most aggressive White House lobbying, however, was directed at Mr. Putin, whose country is pivotal to a separate resolution on the use of force against Iraq that the United States is seeking from the United Nations Security Council. As one of the five permanent members of the Council, Russia can veto any resolution, although Mr. Bush has made it clear that he will act without the United Nations if that becomes necessary. The senior administration official said today that Russia would at least abstain in any Council vote.

Mr. Bush called Mr. Putin from the Oval Office and reached him during a working vacation on the Black Sea. Afterward, the president met with Foreign Minister Igor S. Ivanov and Defense Minister Sergei B. Ivanov. Later, the Russians met for nearly two hours at the State Department with Secretary Powell and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

The Russians pressed Secretary Powell and Mr. Rumsfeld with their concerns about terrorists in the Pankisi Gorge of Georgia, and gave Secretary Powell information suggesting links between some Georgian officials and terrorist groups. In a speech today at the National Press Club, Foreign Minister Ivanov said Russia reserved the right to attack terrorists.

''Using concrete facts and concrete evidence and proofs,'' Mr. Ivanov said, ''we have demonstrated to our counterparts the magnitude of threat presented to Russia by the guerrillas relocated to the Pankisi Valley.''

Some foreign policy experts said today that the Russians might be implicitly seeking a free hand to intervene in Georgia, without American opposition, in exchange for acquiescence on Iraq in the Security Council. In addition, the Russians are concerned about recovering $8 billion in debts they are owed by Iraq.

Asked today if Mr. Bush was offering to pay the Russians the $8 billion as an incentive for Russian support at the United Nations, his press secretary, Ari Fleischer, said no.

''The incentive the president is offering is logic and a straight, direct, from-the-heart talk about the risks that Russia faces and the rest of the world faces, and in addition the American people face, from Saddam Hussein and his relentless quest for weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Fleischer said.

American and Russian officials said Mr. Putin and Mr. Bush would continue to discuss Iraq next month at a summit meeting of Asian nations in Mexico.

By the end of the day, administration officials said that they wanted a vote on the Iraq resolution in Congress by the week after next, and that the meeting with Congressional leaders on the wording of the resolution had been positive.

''It was simple give-and-take about 'what did you mean when you said this and why is that particular phrase here and not there?' '' an administration official said.
