

A NATION AT WAR: UNITED NATIONS; Blair and Annan Confer on U.N. Role in Getting Food and Water to Iraqis
By Felicity Barringer
March 28, 2003

As Iraqi civilian casualties mounted and the disruption of electrical, water and sewage systems in Iraq's southern cities continued, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain met today with Secretary General Kofi Annan to discuss bringing aid to those in need of food, shelter, water and medical care.

As they met, the German mission was delivering a compromise resolution for reauthorizing the Iraqi oil for food program that has been the primary source of food for 14.5 million Iraqis. Several diplomats said the Security Council was close to agreement on the terms of the plan.

A United Nations press release said that Mr. Blair and Mr. Annan had been told the Council might approve the reauthorization of the Iraqi oil for food plan on Friday. At the same time, an American official demurred when asked if the nation could support the current proposal, saying ''we still do not have agreement.''

Earlier, as a two-day Security Council session on the war was ending, the Iraqi ambassador, Mohammed Adouri, launched into a speech criticizing the United States,prompting the United States delegate, John D. Negroponte, to walk out.

The walkout came after Mr. Aldouri said the United States and Britain had been ''hoodwinked'' into believing that ''the children and the mothers will come and rejoice'' at the arrival of allied forces.

Mr. Negroponte said later, ''I'd heard enough after a certain amount of time and I didn't hear anything new.''

The breaking of the weeklong diplomatic logjam on the issue came as the leading American aid agency, USAID, assembled a 64-member disaster assistance response team -- eight times the usual size -- to go into Iraq when the American and British military secured areas from which they can work. In addition, a smaller team of about 10 people is waiting to go into the port city of Umm Qasr. Food and other aid for Umm Qasr and southern Iraq could not reach port today because of mines in the waterway, military commanders said. They added that explosives might be cleared by Friday.

But the crucial issue for United States government relief agencies is money. The support for these efforts is set to come from the President Bush's proposed $75 million supplemental appropriation for the war, which is pending in Congress.

''The most immediate thing we're hoping for is the rapid passage of the supplemental,'' said a senior American aid official. ''We're running on fumes. If the supplemental doesn't go through, we'll be taking the money out of other programs.''.

While the United States government collected and prepared to distribute 200,000 tons of American wheat -- and another 100,000 tons of Australian wheat that had originally been destined for the oil-for-food program -- refugee officials cautioned that those supplies are likely to prove inadequate.

Refugee International estimates that Iraq dwill need 80,000 metric tons of wheat immediately and 410,000 tons each month thereafter to provide full rations to the Iraqi civilian population. Its officials warn that ''nowhere near this quantity of food is ready to be shipped into Iraq.''

The marshaling of food, medical and other supplies by the American military, and private aid groups comes against a backdrop of tension over the current plans to have military supervision over the relief efforts, at least for a brief period.

Thirteen leading private aid groups sent a letter to President Bush urging him ''to ask the United Nations to serve as the humanitarian coordinator for Iraq,'' instead of having United States government aid agencies take the lead in the care of the sick, the wounded, the hungry and the homeless.

In a glancing reference to the widespread resentment over the war, the letter -- from groups ranging from CARE to Save the Children to Refugees International -- said that this approach ''is in the long-term interest of all concerned parties, including the Iraqi people. United Nations leadership will facilitate the participation of the broadest possible coalition of governments in Iraq's reconstruction, which will be a costly, long-term undertaking.''

Several private charities, like Oxfam International and Doctors Without Borders, have said that they will not work under military supervision.

The top priority, officials agree, is clean water. The United States military is building a water pipeline from Kuwait to the Iraqi border. If all works well, fresh water can then be delivered throughout the south.

''Now that war is under way, food distribution has stopped and access to clean water has become increasingly difficult,'' said Raymond C. Offenheiser, president of Oxfam America. ''We know from the last gulf war that most ciivilians died from cholera and other diseases related to dirty water.''

In a move separate from the reauthorization of the oil-for-food program, which has $2.4 billion worth of food and medical supplies in the pipeline for Iraq at the moment, the United Nations is issuing an appeal on Friday for up to $2.2 billion in aid of various kinds for Iraq.

United Nations officials estimate that they will have to assist at least 350,000 refugees with everything from tents to food, and will have to spend more than $60 million restoring electricity to urban areas or providing spare generators.

The logjam on the oil-for-food program was apparently broken when the German compromise gave Russian diplomats their wish by specifiying the ''duty'' of ''occupying powers'' under international treaties, and eliminating language about ''cooperation with relevant authorities,'' which the Russians and Syrians said was a way of legitimizing the war.

But in deference to United States concerns, language restricting the secretary general's flexibility in rearranging contracts to fit the immediate needs was watered down. The resolution reauthorizes the program for 45 days from the date of passage.

On the oil front, the commander of the British forces in the Persian Gulf said that Iraqi oil shipments could begin in three months from southern ports if $1 billion were invested.
