
THREATS AND RESPONSES: WESTERN ALLIANCE; Debate Over Iraq Raises Fears Of a Shrinking Role for NATO
By Craig S. Smith
Jan. 26, 2003

Just two months ago, the 19 members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization vowed publicly to streamline the 54-year-old alliance into an institution ready and able to rise to the challenges of fighting terrorism and protecting against weapons of mass destruction.

Now, with the military club momentarily paralyzed in a debate about its role in a possible war in Iraq, Europeans are wondering again whether the troubled alliance is destined -- in the post-cold-war world -- to become a second-string institution.

Ten days ago, the United States formally asked for help in the potential battle against Iraq. The sluggish reaction of America's 18 NATO allies is causing anxiety among members, who fear that the United States, already predisposed to work outside of multilateral institutions, will again lose interest in NATO.

''If the U.S. neglects NATO, it's hard to see many of the things on the Prague agenda getting done,'' said one worried senior European official, referring to the aggressive list of alliance reforms ratified by NATO leaders in the Czech capital at a summit meeting in November.

Without American interest, NATO ''would become a working institution like the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, but wouldn't be on the front line where key decisions are made,'' the official predicted.

No one in the drab corridors of NATO's Brussels headquarters doubts that the alliance will eventually do what the United States wants, and many note that this is little more than the formal assistance provided by NATO during the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Back then, however, many members of NATO joined the larger multinational alliance forged by the current President Bush's father to drive Iraq from Kuwait.

This time, the United States is likely to have fewer battlefield allies, but wants NATO to send Patriot missiles and Awacs reconnaissance aircraft to help deter Iraq from attacking Turkey, for example. Other NATO nations will be expected to plug gaps left by British troops that might be diverted from peacekeeping activities in the Balkans.

The American ambassador to NATO, R. Nicholas Burns, sought this week to calm any European fears about American reliance on NATO. ''The United States believes NATO is vital for our interests in Europe,'' he said.

''We have suggested that NATO be prepared to take precautionary measures for the defense of Turkey should that be necessary and are confident that will occur,'' he said.

But four countries -- France, Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg -- have so far refused to reply to the American request while United Nations weapons inspections in Iraq are still under way.

''It will suggest that we see war as inevitable,'' said a senior NATO official.

With no serious military assets of its own other than a fleet of Awacs aircraft, and with its members' increasingly outdated armed forces outstripped by the United States, the alliance is regarded by many in Washington as more of an encumbrance than an enhancement to American military aims.

''To some degree, if NATO doesn't come out of Iraq looking good, it's going to be hard to make the case in Washington that it is an important partner,'' said a NATO official.

In Europe, too, NATO's importance is being questioned as that of the European Union seems to grow. The 15-nation union, which has developed a security policy of its own, is expected to take over NATO peacekeeping responsibilities in Macedonia this year and eventually to supplant NATO in other Balkan states.

Perhaps the biggest question mark over NATO is its purpose. During the cold war, the Soviet threat was a clear binding factor. Now, said Celeste A. Wallander, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington: ''People pretend to agree on what threats are out there, but they don't agree really. They don't even agree on how to define transnational terrorism.''

Many members worry that the planned expansion of NATO to 26 members will slow decision-making even further.

After American commitment to the alliance wavered during the early 1990's, it revived late in the decade when the United Nations balked at military intervention in the Balkans, and Washington used the alliance to fight there instead. But American generals came away frustrated by the experience of the Kosovo war in 1999, complaining that NATO's outdated forces and complicated bureaucracy slowed them down.

The United States left the alliance largely out of the war in Afghanistan because it wanted to move quickly and could do the job alone.

Now, countries in Washington's camp say it is time for NATO to show it is ready to act on American requests for specific help against Iraq and on its Prague commitments.

''It's an opportunity to reposition NATO as a meaningful partner in the war against terrorism and as a useful U.S. ally,'' said a senior NATO official. ''The risk is that the U.S. will be able to cobble together what they need in bilateral talks and NATO will again be left behind.''

To encourage the alliance to respond quickly, the United States and its supporters have dropped suggestions that NATO aid in any postwar reconstruction of Iraq -- which presupposes an invasion -- and are focusing instead on plans for the defense of Turkey.

''This is about protecting an ally,'' said Karel Kovanda, the Czech ambassador to NATO. ''It is central to the alliance.''

But France, Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg insist that there is no rush and complain that Washington is trying to use the alliance for its own political gains.

''We advised the Americans not to make their request so early,'' said one NATO official this week. The leaking of Washington's request, he said, added to the appearance of pressure on member nations. He insisted that planning for Turkey's defense could wait until the threat was imminent.

''That planning is on the shelf,'' said another NATO official. ''It will take two days.''
