

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | NASIRIYA; A Sudden Iraqi Attack at Sunset Surprises a Key Marine Center South of the Euphrates
By Michael Wilson
March 28, 2003

Even as Marine officers proclaimed this Euphrates River city secured after four days of street fighting, Iraqi troops launched at sunset Wednesday the largest and most organized surprise attack yet on the American positions south of the river.

Infantry units reported as many as 1,000 Iraqi soldiers mustering at a railroad depot just south of Nasiriya. American artillery units opened fire on them, but the Iraqi fighters had already fanned out southward toward crucial Marine outposts. The regimental headquarters and the central command of the artillery batteries both received machine-gun fire and faced the threat of being overrun.

In the ensuing battle, which went on for hours into the night, there were 31 injuries, mostly concussions and lacerations, and no reported deaths among the few hundred marines involved. Iraqi casualties were unknown.

The attack startled an artillery unit that until now had been far removed from flying bullets, from the almost-hoarse colonel cursing and slamming his combat radio on the table in frustration to the young corporals ordered to defend the camp's perimeter berm with their rifles and night-vision goggles.

By dawn, the camps began taking new defensive measures. Artillery batteries pulled back, closer to their headquarters. Bulldozers plowed thick berms around the camps, and marines spent the day digging ''fight holes'' -- deep enough to stand in straight up with only the head and shoulders exposed.

They dug in physically, and psychologically. A plan to pull back to a safer spot farther south was rejected by the artillery unit's commanding officer.

''I don't want to appear to be running from the battle,'' said. Col. Glenn Starnes, who has led the attacks and counterattacks at Nasiriya since Sunday morning. Also, he said, further distance from the infantry would threaten communication lines. Radios routinely fail and are quickly replaced in the middle of a battle.

Marine units have been blocking roads that could be used by Iraqi fighters, but apparently ignored the railroad line. Inside the cramped command tent, an intelligence officer, Lt. Josh Cusworth, looked up from his map.

''That's how they're coming in,'' he said, pointing. ''That railroad. We're not monitoring it whatsoever. We don't think they're using it. That's how they're getting in.''

Suddenly, a captain from one of the howitzer batteries shouted over the radio that his unit was taking machine-gun fire.

''I'm seeing green tracers,'' he said, referring to glowing rounds that help riflemen aim their weapons. Marines use red tracers. The artillery battery returned fire.

South of there, at the headquarters camp, several marines heard the distinctive whoosh of small arms fire overhead. Officers ordered all spare personnel to the perimeter.

Nearby, the regimental headquarters was also taking fire, and officers quickly made plans to transfer command of the Nasiriya fight to the artillery unit if the headquarters was overrun.

In the dark, it was impossible to tell how close the Iraqi attackers were. A major, one of the senior artillery officers, passed his pistol to a younger marine, grabbed a rifle and ran for the berm. The Iraqis had chosen the first calm night in several days for their attack, and the camp was quiet and dark, all unnecessary light extinguished.

Throughout the night, artillery fired. Two infantry units fought very close together, with the Iraqi fighters in between. At one point, there was fear that American artillery fire might have struck marines. (Today, that did not appear to have been the case, American officers said.)

An ambulance left the headquarters camp to collect wounded. ''You've got to be careful sending your ambulance in there,'' Maj. Phil Boggs told a marine doctor.

A communications officer entered the tent and pulled several small, electronic boxes from a safe. They held the codes for the cryptographic system used to keep radio transmissions secret, and in the event of the command tent being overrun, they would have to be destroyed.

Beside the boxes, the American officer set a stack of papers detailing the coding system, and on top of the stack, one of the books of matches that comes with every ready-made meal that feeds the troops. Under the table was an empty ammunition box, for burning the documents. ''On your command, sir,'' he told Colonel Starnes, who nodded.

A marine on the berm spotted several civilian vehicles to the west with his heat-detecting goggles.

''The west side? That's this way,'' Major Boggs said inside the tent, pointing. ''There should be no friendlies there.''

After a tense several minutes, the group of vehicles appeared to belong to people who lived nearby.

''There are mud huts, what do you call them, shanties,'' said Capt. Walker Field. ''This is occurring where they are.''

Then, as quickly as it began, the threat seemed to ebb. Men headed off for their cots, tucking into sleeping bags under the stars, their boots and helmets within arm's reach.

Major Boggs looked up at the colonel. ''Tonight was a large, coordinated attack,'' he said.

''I think so,'' the colonel replied.

Today, wreckage from the battle remained along the road north to Nasiriya. Two burned-out Humvees belonged to marines. Several shelled tanks, their top hatches thrown open, belonged to the Iraqis.

Fighting slowed during the day today, but did not stop.

''We had a good day,'' said Lt. Col. Brent Dunahoe, commanding officer of an artillery battalion outside Nasiriya. ''We captured a general, we captured an army captain. We found a Baath headquarters and captured about eight billion documents.''

Colonel Starnes said there was always the expectation of resistance in Nasiriya, since weeks ago, when the city's two bridges became part of the grand plan to move troops north toward Baghdad.

But younger marines were just today accepting the fact that they would be bogged down outside Nasiriya for perhaps days to come, looking over their shoulders.

''It's going to get worse,'' said Lt. Mark Empey. ''Everybody thinks so. They know we're here now.''
