

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE EVIDENCE; Islamists in Iraq Offer a Tour of 'Poison Factory' Cited by Powell
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 9, 2003

Ansar al Islam, the militant Islamic group that occupies a small part of northern Iraq, briefly opened access today to a primitive military compound that the United States has described as a poisons and explosives factory that is supported by both Baghdad and Al Qaeda.

The existence of this camp, with a headquarters for what Ansar calls its Victory Brigade, was disclosed this week by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in a presentation to the United Nations Security Council.

Mr. Powell said the camp had been established by a network led by Abu Mussab al-Zarqawi, an associate of Osama bin Laden who is accused of coordinating the killing of an American diplomat in Jordan last year.

The secretary offered it as a reason to consider using force against Saddam Hussein, saying that although it is in a region out of Mr. Hussein's control, it had been supported by Mr. Zarqawi's network from Baghdad, and that this network was teaching its operatives how to produce poisons.

Continue reading the main story
Senior Kurdish officials have expanded on Mr. Powell's remarks, saying in recent days that the camp was used to experiment with toxins on animals, and that Ansar had managed to develop poison paints and ointments, toxic creams that could be put on doorknobs for assassination attempts, and even poison-laced cigarettes that they had tried to sneak into public markets.

In what seemed an effort to rebut these claims, Ansar allowed about 20 journalists to pass through its front lines this afternoon and enter the Victory Brigade compound.

They found a wholly unimpressive place -- a small and largely undeveloped cluster of buildings that appeared to lack substantial industrial capacity. For example, the structures did not have plumbing and had only the limited electricity supplied by a generator.

Roughly half the buildings in the compound appeared to have recently been civilian homes, and one contained the sandals of a small child. The remaining buildings were in military or political use, serving as fighter's barracks or as a television and radio station for the Islamic party.

Two Ansar officials who escorted journalists through the compound's buildings spoke of its unmistakably crude condition and dismissed Mr. Powell's allegation as baseless. ''This place is an isolated place, and we have just our weapons,'' said Ayub Khidir, adding that by weapons he meant rifles, rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns.

Continue reading the main story
When one of the journalists asked why Mr. Khidir thought Mr. Powell had singled out the compound as one reason to risk war, Mr. Khidir shrugged. ''We ask that question to ourselves, and we are still looking for an answer,'' he said.

A senior State Department official maintained today that no matter the rough conditions at Sarget, Mr. Powell's characterization of the compound was accurate. ''A poison factory is a term of art,'' he said, ''and it doesn't necessarily mean that people are pumping out thousands of gallons a year.''

He also noted that intelligence experts had watched the movements of people and material in and out of the camp over time, and had collaborated the analysis with other sources of information. ''We just don't take pictures of something and say, 'Oh my God, it's a poison center,' '' he said.

No matter how much insight the visit appeared to offer into the Victory Brigade's grounds, and on the surface to contradict Mr. Powell's description, today's tour was ultimately inconclusive, conducted by journalists and not by weapons or poisons experts.

Its value was further degraded by the fact that three days had passed since Mr. Powell concluded his remarks -- ample time to remove suspect material or to import innocuous-looking items, like a baby's cradle that was in one room that appeared to have been a family home.

Moreover, although Ansar greeted the visitors warmly, the visit was chaperoned by young armed men. These fighters, who mostly seemed curious, did at times restrict journalists' movement.

For example, journalists found that the gunmen did not allow them inside two of seven apartmentlike rooms said to be in civilian use. The gunmen said families were living there; in one case, a young veiled woman peered through a crack in the gate, and then locked it closed.

Continue reading the main story
Ansar also used the visit to press its message on the foreigners. The group had a brief news conference in its television studio, during which Muhammad Hassan, a spokesman, said the group was supported by no outside countries, raised its own money and had no foreign fighters.

Those claims are at odds with the analysis of many Western officials, who say the group is linked to Al Qaeda and is host to as many as 150 foreign fighters who fled Afghanistan as the Taliban was defeated.

The behavior of the Ansar hosts was alarming at times. Mr. Khidir, who wore a heavy beard and a dark black-and-blue scarf as a headdress, is also known as Ayub Afghan, a nickname he earned for reportedly serving as a jihad fighter against the Soviet Army in Afghanistan in the 1980's.

He is accused by the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, which governs most of this region, of being one of the instructors in Ansar's militant training camps and of being the group's top bombmaker.

As journalists prepared to leave, Mr. Khidir advanced on a small group of them. Backed by stern-faced gunmen, he turned his own video camera on them, demanding to know what they thought of Mr. Powell's ''rumor.''

He pointed forcefully at each, and asked for their answers. He was ultimately satisfied with answers like, ''I have seen nothing,'' or ''Thank you for allowing us to do our jobs.''

The journalists were then allowed to leave, passing outside the wire fence that surrounded the compound and was marked with white signs, each bearing a red skull and crossbones and the stenciled image of an antipersonnel mine.
