

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SETTING THE STAGE; Iraq's Parliament Rejects U.N. Resolution
By Neil MacFarquhar
Nov. 13, 2002

See the article in its original context from November 13, 2002, Section A, Page 17Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
Iraq's Parliament played out a show of defiance today, rejecting the United Nations resolution demanding tougher arms inspections but leaving the way open for Saddam Hussein to accept it.

The two-day parliamentary debate in Baghdad was seen as vintage Hussein stagecraft, complete with the leader's eldest son, Uday, also a member of Parliament, raising a lone voice urging the country to consent to Security Council Resolution 1441.

The session of Iraq's toothless, 250-member Parliament allowed the country to present a unified, fearless front before the world, analysts said. Most important, from Iraq's perspective, it paved the way for Mr. Hussein to step in and say that, despite the wishes of his people, he was going to accept far tougher sanctions in order to spare the region another war.

''I don't think Saddam has any alternative other than to accept,'' said an Arab journalist with wide experience in Iraq. ''If he says yes, maybe he will gain time, but if he says no he knows he will be hit right away.''

Continue reading the main story
In Washington, President Bush dismissed the Parliament's action, saying the only opinion that counts in Iraq is Mr. Hussein's. ''The Iraqi Parliament is nothing but a rubber stamp for Saddam Hussein,'' Mr. Bush said. ''This guy's a dictator, so we'll have to wait and see what he says.''

The one predictable aspect of Mr. Hussein's rule for more than two decades is that he will do anything to stay in power, which is what is at stake in Iraq agreeing to the new sanctions regime by the Friday deadline, analysts said.

''I would imagine him saying that the people said no, but he sees the decision from the perspective of protecting the Iraqi people, and I think he can get away with it, no problem,'' said Muhammad Kamal, an assistant professor of political science at Cairo University. ''He will say yes to the resolution because it is not about Iraq this time, it is about his own political survival.''

The parliamentary decision came in the form of a unanimous recommendation to the Revolutionary Command Council, the cabinet headed by Mr. Hussein, to reject new inspectors looking for weapons of mass destruction.

''Parliament's recommendations are to reject the U.N. resolution in accordance with the opinion of our people, who put their confidence in us, and authorize the political leadership to take the appropriate decision to defend Iraq's independence, sovereignty and dignity,'' said the motion, which was read by Salem al-Qubaissi, the chairman of the Parliament's Arab and International Relations Committee. But the motion then deferred to the country's leader, ''Parliament authorizes President Saddam Hussein to take the appropriate decision and will stand by our leadership.''

Continue reading the main story
The vote followed hours of speeches attacking the resolution, with one deputy describing it as ''a road map that will lead to the invasion of Iraq.''

The Parliament speaker, Saadoun Hammadi, described the vote as a message to the United States that the people of Iraq are united against inspections deemed too difficult to implement. Resolution 1441 gives United Nations arms experts sweeping new rights and Iraq 30 days to submit a detailed list of its weapons.

''Parliament's decision reflects our opinion of this bad-intentioned resolution, which is full of wrong information and lies,'' Mr. Hammadi told reporters afterward. ''This resolution was designed to provoke Iraq in every detail.''

The lone dissent came in a letter issued by Uday Hussein, who controls a popular television station and a newspaper. He rarely makes public appearances, after having been badly wounded in an assassination attempt in 1996. He said the resolution should be accepted with the proviso that the inspection teams include Arab weapons experts -- just as the Arab League stipulated in an earlier resolution.

''We should, as a National Assembly, accept the U.N. resolution,'' he wrote. ''This does not necessarily mean that we're surrendering to America because for us our conflict with America will continue for the next 20 years due to our ideological, religious and fundamental differences with them.''

He said Iraq had to allow diplomacy the chance to work, but given that the United Nations resolution was probably just a pretext to attack Iraq, the country should be prepared to fight.

''We have to know our enemy, and that the U.N. resolution does not mean stopping him from committing military action,'' Uday Hussein said.

Continue reading the main story
His letter repeated some of the measures that Iraq tried and failed over the weekend to get the Arab League to support, including one that would cut off oil supplies to countries that assist any attack on Iraq.

Iraq watchers say there is fairly uniform agreement among the country's senior leadership that they should at least try another round of inspections, in the distant hope that it might result in the lifting of United Nations sanctions imposed in 1990. But the leaders appear divided about whether the latest resolution makes war inevitable or might stave it off. Uday Hussein's letter seems to indicate that his father is coming down on the side of the latter, analysts said.

Countries that have been close to Iraq in the past were urging Saddam Hussein not to play with fire. Both Russia and France pushed for acceptance of the resolution, with the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, issuing a sterner warning than usual that Iraq faces the use of force if it does not cooperate.

In Egypt, President Hosni Mubarak said he had advised Iraq to allow new weapons inspections without hindrance.

''It is important for Iraq to realize the seriousness of the situation, that it accept the U.N. Security Council resolution and that it allow the arms inspectors to undertake their mission without obstacles,'' Mr. Mubarak said, adding that he thought it would be unlikely for Washington to launch an attack if Iraq commits to the resolution.
