

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DEFENSES; IRAQ'S AIR DEFENSE IS CONCENTRATED AROUND BAGHDAD
By Michael R. Gordon With John F. Burns
March 17, 2003

Iraq, in an effort to stiffen its defense of Baghdad, has ringed its capital with air defenses that are more formidable than those used during the Persian Gulf war of 1991, according to senior American military officials.

Saddam Hussein ''has brought back almost all his significant resources into a heavy defense of Baghdad,'' Maj. Gen. Dan Leaf, the chief Air Force officer in the headquarters of the allied land commander, said last week. ''It is a hornet's nest right now. There is nothing subtle about it.''

Asked to compare Iraq's air defenses with those during the gulf war, General Leaf said: ''Countrywide they are weaker. In Baghdad they are stronger because they have brought everything in.''

Iraq also reshuffled its high command, putting the defense of the country in the hands of his most loyal relatives and deputies, the government announced today. Mr. Hussein will retain control of Iraq's aviation, air defenses and surface-to-surface missile system. His son Qusay will have responsibility for the defense of Baghdad and the Iraqi leader's hometown, Tikrit.

Continue reading the main story
To try to strengthen his hold on the south, Mr. Hussein has selected Ali Hassan al-Majid, known by Iraqi opponents of the government as ''chemical Ali'' because they say he oversaw a chemical attack against the Kurds. Mr. Majid's headquarters will probably be located in the southern city of Nasiriyah.

Mr. Hussein put another loyal deputy, Izzat Ibrahim, in command of the strategic northern region. Mazban Khader Hadi, a member of the ruling Revolutionary Command Council, was put in charge of a region in the country's center.

Mr. Hussein's Revolutionary Command Council said the establishment of the new military districts would enable Iraq's military to ''take the necessary steps to repulse and destroy any foreign aggression.''

But apparently in an effort to maintain calm at home and dispel moves toward an internal uprising, Mr. Hussein's government appears to be shielding ordinary Iraqis from the imminence of a possible American attack. Television programs today made no mention of the summit meeting in which the United States, Britain and Spain called for immediate compliance with their disarmament demands and said the time for diplomacy to head off a war would end on Monday. The government has not ordered households to prepare to cope with air strikes, and few shop and hotel windows in central Baghdad have been taped over.

American military officials have been saying for some time that Mr. Hussein plans to make his final stand in Baghdad, a move that would allow him to play to world opinion and confront the United States with the prospect of urban warfare, possibly inflicting many casualties.

Continue reading the main story
Iraq's efforts to strengthen its air defenses is intended to serve that strategy in several ways. Iraq is trying to blunt the effect of air strikes that American military planners hope will substantially weaken and possibly topple Mr. Hussein's government. In addition, the American ground forces would want to control the skies over Baghdad during any armored and infantry thrust inside the city, if that is required to bring down the government.

United States Air Force officials say that the Baghdad area is thick with surface-to-air missiles, heavy machine guns and antiaircraft artillery. In addition, there have been efforts to cluster antiaircraft artillery along possible attack routes for cruise missiles.

Trenches surrounding the capital are being filled with oil so they can be set aflame to obscure the battlefield and try to make it more difficult for allied air power to strike its targets, a tactic that is likely to be of only limited effectiveness since the United States military now has satellite-guided bombs.

Iraq has also completed moving its Adnan Republican Guard division from Mosul to Tikrit, which protects Mr. Hussein's hometown and the northern route to Baghdad.

To try to slow the allied advance toward Baghdad, Iraq has positioned artillery among the pipelines and oil infrastructure of southern Iraq. The artillery has the range to reach the northern tip of Kuwait. Iraq has also placed more representatives from its security services in regular army units to discourage defections and encourage the soldiers to fight.

Despite those steps, American military planners say they are confident that allied forces will win decisively and many expect the conflict to be relatively quick, measured in weeks and days and not in months. American forces are planning to use an enormous quantity of bombs -- 3,000 precision-guided bombs and missiles in the first 48 hours alone -- to try to disable Iraq's air defenses and command and control and stun Mr. Hussein's government.

The air defense of Baghdad consists of several Soviet-designed systems: the SA-2, SA-3, SA-6 and SA-8. Iraq has been trying to upgrade the missiles and radar for those systems and put them in strategic positions.

Continue reading the main story
''They have a great deal of triple A and heavy machine guns,'' said General Leaf, referring to antiaircraft artillery. ''And if you put enough lead in the air somebody is going to get hit if they are at the altitudes that those bullets can reach. That's a robust air defense system.''

The United States has sought to knock out many command posts in the no-flight zones, particularly in the south. But coalition commanders expect Iraq to use observers on the ground who could help mount a defense in the Baghdad area.

''They will generally know there is an attack coming and because they have their defense compressed around Baghdad they will be able to respond and put a lot of missiles and a lot of bullets in the air and that will make Baghdad a very tough problem,'' General Leaf said.

''The volume of it is significant,'' General Leaf said, referring to antiaircraft artillery. '' I think there will be even more in Baghdad and there was a lot in Desert Storm.''
