

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; U.S. and Britain Drafting Resolution to Impose Deadline on Iraq
By Patrick E. Tyler
Sept. 26, 2002

The United States, with Britain's help, is drafting a United Nations resolution that would give Saddam Hussein about two months to demonstrate his willingness to cooperate fully with weapons inspectors and to make new efforts to comply with the resolutions that ended the Persian Gulf war, administration officials and United Nations diplomats said today.

But the drafting process is being slowed by the ideological divides within the Bush administration and between Washington and allied capitals over the United Nations' role in authorizing the use of force, some officials asserted today.

A White House official said tonight that the draft was essentially completed, but that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell needed more time to consult with leaders of key Security Council nations over whether they would accept a strongly worded resolution that says the Security Council endorses the use of force to bring Iraq into compliance if inspections fail.

''The secretary is going to prepare this one very carefully before he slaps something on the table,'' a senior State Department official said.

Continue reading the main story
France remains a critical holdout. President Jacques Chirac said on Tuesday that France would not oppose discussions on a new resolution, but would not agree to including a threat of force. France has not ruled out the possibility of such a threat in a later resolution if Iraq fails to cooperate with inspectors.

China's position also is uncertain. In Beijing, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji said, ''We request that Iraq comply with U.N. resolutions without any preconditions.'' But he added that a decision by the United States to act outside the United Nations ''will lead to severe consequences.''

Russia, while agreeing to discuss a new resolution, also remained guarded about its position, though Bush administration officials believe that Mr. Bush will be able to persuade President Vladimir V. Putin to support the United States or stand aside.

On a day when politics and a sense of war fever seemed to boil over in Washington, a senior administration official familiar with the drafting process said, ''I personally don't think weapons inspectors will ever return to Iraq.''

He said in an interview that ''the president is not going to worry about the Security Council'' because he will have all the authorization he needs from Congress.

Continue reading the main story
''Once Congress acts, that's the final -- that's all that has to happen in our system,'' the official said.

This view betrayed the strong feelings within the administration over how to position the United States on Iraq. But it was not clear whether the clash of views or reaching a consensus among the five permanent members of the Security Council was responsible for holding up the resolution.

The policy pragmatists around Secretary Powell have apparently reached a compromise with conservatives in the Pentagon and White House on Iraq, several officials said today. Their strategy has been to work for the strongest possible resolution, one that would support ''a tank or a squadron of F-15's,'' as one official said.

Secretary Powell is said to have won the backing of the president's more conservative advisers for an ironclad resolution through the United Nations to test Mr. Hussein's willingness to submit to inspections and the Security Council's willingness to authorize force if inspections fail.

In return, Secretary Powell has made it clear that he will back the use of military force if working through the United Nations fails.

He showed his resolve today in an interview with British Broadcasting Corporation radio.

''The U.S. continues to believe that the best way to disarm Iraq is through a regime change,'' he said.

''Pressure has to be maintained on Iraq until the U.N. is satisfied that he has got rid of these weapons or allowed inspectors in to make sure of that -- that's the only way to do it -- and then we'll see whether or not that's adequate or whether more action is needed.''

Continue reading the main story
At the same time, administration officials and members of the Iraqi opposition are taking steps to convey to Iraq's people that the United States is serious about removing Mr. Hussein and that the support of the population could be critical to the success of military operations.

The increased frequency of patrols and bombing missions against Iraqi targets ''reflects an interagency decision to move forward with these kinds of strikes'' both to remove targets ''that will eventually have to be removed anyway,'' an administration official said, and secondly, so the population would know ''that we are serious.''

Mr. Bush is expected to notify Congress in coming days that he has decided to spend up to $92 million to begin providing ''lethal assistance'' in the form of military training and arms to Iraqi opposition volunteers and Kurdish fighters in Iraq.

The training program, first reported by The Los Angeles Times, represented a significant policy change that would also signal to the Iraqi people the American resolve to change the Iraqi government, State Department officials said.

Iraqi opposition groups have been asked to compile lists of young men with military experience or detailed knowledge of certain regions, administration officials said.

One phase of the program would train Iraqi volunteers to help American forces spot and illuminate targets, gather intelligence and interact with the Iraqi population.

In an interview today on the PBS program ''The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer,'' Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said for the first time that the administration had evidence that Iraq had trained some members of Al Qaeda in the use of chemical weapons.

Continue reading the main story
Ms. Rice said ''there have been contacts between senior Iraqi officials and members of Al Qaeda going back for actually quite a long time.''

She added, ''We know too that several of the detainees, in particular some high ranking detainees, have said that Iraq provided some training to Al Qaeda in chemical weapons development.''

Her office gave no further details.
