
EDUCATION; Out of the Mouths of Students: Talk of Iraq
By Merri Rosenberg
March 16, 2003

CONSIDER it the ultimate current events lesson.

The entire student body at Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua -- 1,140 ninth through 12th graders -- filled the gym during a schoolwide forum on Iraq last week.

Five students, representing extracurricular organizations including Amnesty International and the Students for Social Justice Club and two social studies teachers presented arguments for and against war in Iraq. After the half-hour presentation, students dispersed to 50 classrooms to continue the discussion in small groups.

Students heard a balanced and respectful presentation from both students and faculty members.

''Iraq does not pose a significant threat to the United States,'' said Keenan Steiner, a senior and the Student Council treasurer. ''Invading Iraq will end up hurting our national security. The consequence of war with Iraq is just too scary.''

Another student, Michael Pollack, a junior, had a different perspective. ''The world's security has been challenged by Saddam Hussein,'' he said. ''Saddam has refused to disarm. War is scary and war is dangerous. But we have to recognize the terror Saddam is.''

Continue reading the main story
Emily Curran, a senior, said: ''Another war will only inflame Islamic radicals. A war against Iraq will not prevent terrorism. It will incite it.''

And Kristin Kelly, a senior, said: ''A few weeks ago, I would have said that I was against the war. Most of all, I would have condemned the haste. But Saddam has one of the most disgusting records of human rights abuses. His use of chemical weapons is even more indiscriminate. Saddam is a threat to his own country, and a terrifying threat to us.''

While Chappaqua's forum was one of the more ambitious attempts to deal with questions about war in Iraq, the subject is very much on the radar at schools in the county. Irvington High School plans to hold a similar program on Friday. Some eighth-grade social studies classes at Robert R. Bell Middle School in Chappaqua conducted a research project about war in Iraq from economic, social and geopolitical perspectives. At the Ursuline School in New Rochelle, middle school students are examining issues of war in Iraq as a current events exercise.

''In social studies, the teachers are incorporating Iraq into class discussion,'' said Steven Goldberg, social studies department chairman at New Rochelle High School. ''Students are following events on the national and international front, and teachers are having students discuss events as they unfold, whether it's the speeches by the president or secretary of state or the situation at the United Nations.''

Horace Greeley students who are enrolled in the school's elective on foreign policy spent considerable time analyzing United Nations Resolution 1441. Earlier this winter, students at Croton-Harmon High School heard from a West Point officer about his experiences fighting in Afghanistan. Many Westchester students participated in the protest against the war on Feb. 15 at the United Nations, and students from Croton-Harmon, Chappaqua, Dobbs Ferry, Ossining and Mamaroneck. were among those who walked out of class as part of a national protest on March 5.

Continue reading the main story
Like their counterparts around the country, students are concerned about the situation, and teachers are eager to capture their interest in current events to lead to further discussions.

''You can't teach now without talking about current events,'' said Joel Adelberg, principal of Croton-Harmon High School, where 150 of the school's 400 students walked out of class on March 5. ''There is not a monolith on student opinion. It's similar to the split around the country. For many of these students, there's the immediacy, relevancy and urgency of the draft. Their futures are uncertain.''

There is a sense of urgency about students' engagement with the subject.

As Kate Charleston, director of social studies for the Ossining school district, said: ''These kids are afraid. These kids are the ones who'd be called up.''

In the discussion groups at Horace Greeley the possibility of war with Iraq was a concern, but so was the threat of nuclear weapons in North Korea and the potential terrorist target that nearby Indian Point represents.

''The threat is here,'' said Victoria Hershey, a junior who pointed out that ''there's a bottle of water on our English teacher's desk so we can take the potassium iodide pills. It's all very scary.''

Her classmate Brendan Murnane, whose older brother is at the Naval Academy in Annapolis, said: ''We lost a lot of innocent lives on Sept. 11. This is still the same war.''

Teachers are incorporating conversations about Iraq into their lesson plans.

''It fits into all four years of the social studies curriculum very well,'' said Ms. Charleston. ''In Global Studies, you're dealing with themes of imperialism, for example, or the Balfour decision. Our kids need to understand why everyone is so upset in the Middle East. They need to understand how we are all interrelated. We give them context. You have to follow the news. You study history to make better political decisions in a democracy. We want to give them context. This is a teachable moment, and we run with it.''

Continue reading the main story
Jeff Engel's Global Studies students at New Rochelle High School read newspaper articles about Iraq as part of a unit on Stalin and the Russian Revolution as a way of understanding the use of propaganda. His ninth-graders, now studying the Crusades, are expected to see the connections between that period and Islamic jihad.

''Current events is a hook right now,'' said Mr. Engel. ''In that lesson on propaganda, we were comparing what Stalin did to what's going on in Iraq, where there's a one-sided point of view. What's going on is serious stuff, but it gets the kids into the stuff. They make the connection. ''

As Wallis Brozman, a Horace Greeley junior said: ''People are going to die. That's going to happen in a war. There's no good side to a war.'
