A NATION AT WAR: THE TV WATCH; As the Conflict in Iraq Deepens, So Does the Debate About Coverage
By Alessandra Stanley
March 30, 2003

''The Invasion Pauses'' was the headline for ABC's evening news on Friday. As coalition troops dug trucks out of the mud on screen, the Pentagon reporter, John McWethy, summed it up this way, ''The supply lines are a mess.''

On the Fox News channel that same evening, Geraldo Rivera gave a more gallant assessment, likening the resupply effort he witnessed while traveling with American troops to the Berlin airlift.

As the conflict in Iraq deepens, so has the debate about television coverage. Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld complained on Friday that ''media mood swings'' were distorting the depiction of American military strategy. Actually, the movement was less up and down than across the ideological spectrum.

In the initial phase, the loudest complaints about bias were lodged by antiwar groups frustrated that television gave scant attention to their protests. As casualties mounted, so did conservatives' laments about a liberal bias at the networks. Fox News led the charge. Bill O'Reilly, the network's most popular commentator and most fervent France basher, described the ABC News anchor, Peter Jennings, as an ''internationalist,'' which he defined as someone ''who puts foreign countries on the same plane as the United States in the war on terror.''

Continue reading the main story
Fox's commitment to boosting the war effort seemed to revive the old French theory that art and journalism should be put at the service of ideology -- a Fox News version of ''littérature engagée.''

On the left, antiwar activists argued that the consolidation of media ownership by corporate giants has led to a ''foxification'' of American news shows.

But Americans now have a proliferation of television choices not available during Operation Desert Storm. In 1991, CNN was the only cable news network, and only the Pentagon could provide footage of the bombing campaign. NBC, ABC and CBS were the only mainstream alternatives. Americans now have other options besides Fox and MSNBC. The BBC World Service, held up by many antiwar organizations as a less partisan source of news, is now widely available to American viewers. Even Al Jazeera can be found on satellite TV.

''The real bias in what we are seeing on television is the bias towards confusion,'' Tom Rosenstiel, director of the Project for Excellence in Journalism, a nonprofit organization in Washington, said.

Pentagon officials have urged viewers not to believe everything they see on television, saying that even the most disturbing images are what Mr. Rumsfeld described as only a ''slice of the war in Iraq.''

Continue reading the main story
Increasingly, networks are being judged by how they assemble the pieces.

''The question is not whether journalists are being fair, but how you define fairness in the first place,'' S. Robert Lichter, president of the Center for Media and Public Affairs, a nonprofit research organization in Washington, said. ''It is the most basic question: Should they be a partisan or an objective observer? Usually, it is easy to say journalists cannot be partisan, but it is not so easy to say they should not be patriotic.''

It is the definition of patriotism that cleaves Fox from other newsrooms. Fox embraces a passionate partisanship; ABC and others view impartial reporting as their contribution to the national good.

All newscasts have been careful to show respect for American troops and their families, and the American flag is woven into graphics, newscast promotions and features. But even semantic distinctions indicate a news program's sensibility. On Saturday, NBC and other networks described the car bomb in Najaf that killed four servicemen as a ''suicide bombing.'' Fox chose ''homicide bombing.''

Fox News refers to the conflict as a ''war of liberation,'' and uses the Pentagon's name, ''Op Iraqi Freedom.'' When CNN uses the same phrase on its graphics, it puts the words in quotes.

Even casual conversation conveys the differences. Fox, which found its voice in talk radio, is less reliant on visual images than on colorful, sometimes slangy conversation. Anchors talk about American troops ''shellacking'' the enemy and describe Mr. Hussein as ''twisted.'' The Fox anchor, John Gibson, told viewers that Saddam Hussein had used chemical weapons ''against his own people,'' adding, ''He is down with that.''

All networks, including Fox, have shown images of civilian casualties and protests inflaming the Arab world. ABC, which labeled its first report after war broke out ''When diplomacy fails,'' has become the bête noire of conservative groups. On Internet chat rooms, e-mail campaigns and on Fox, critics complain that the network is so studiously neutral it might as well be Swiss.

Jeff Schneider, a spokesman for ABC, said that since the left and the right have lodged complaints about ABC's news coverage, ''it shows we are doing our job very well.''

Continue reading the main story
Most Americans do not seem unhappy with the coverage thus far. Based on a nationwide survey of 814 adults conducted March 24-27 by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, 51 percent said they had a ''fair amount of confidence,'' that the news media is giving an accurate picture of the war.

Fox News has been bullish about the war. Two days after the first missile attacks on Baghdad, the network's morning show, ''Fox & Friends,'' displayed a still photograph of Mr. Bush talking with aides in the Oval Office, his glasses on and his jacket off. ''The administration is really going out of its way to show the truth,'' the co-host, Brian Kilmeade, exclaimed to his guest, William Kristol, the conservative columnist. Mr. Kristol was a bit more cautious. ''Right now, the truth is favorable to the president,'' he said.

On Saturday morning, Fox anchors appeared to be struggling with reports echoed on their own news updates that Pentagon officials had underestimated the amount of resistance.

''This is what gets me about the media dwelling on this,'' Bob Sellers said. He described the war effort as ''on track.''