
A NATION AT WAR: ANKARA; Turkey Sends Army Troops Into Iraq, Report Says
By Frank Bruni
March 22, 2003

Turkish troops moved across the border into northern Iraq tonight, hours after the country's leaders announced that they had opened their airspace to American military planes bound for Iraq.

Between 1,000 and 1,500 Turkish soldiers crossed into Iraq at Cukurca, in the far east of Turkey near where it borders both Iraq and Iran, Turkish military officials said.

The move appeared certain to anger both Bush administration officials in Washington and the Kurds of northern Iraq. The White House has been frustrated by Turkey's refusal to allow American troops mount a ground attack into northern Iraq from Turkey, and Turkey's long delay in acting on a request for cooperation made over three months ago.

There is deep concern in Turkey that the Kurds in northern Iraq may use the war to set up an independent Kurdistan, which Turkish officials fear would inflame their own large Kurdish minority.

Continue reading the main story
The Turkish foreign minister, Abdullah Gul, said tonight in Ankara, the capital, that Turkish troops intended to enter Iraq to prevent any flight of refugees into Turkey.

''Turkish troops will go in,'' Mr. Gul said.

One Turkish soldier near Silopi, about 15 miles north of the Iraqi border, said that Turkish troops had already done that. The soldier declined to give his name.

The Turkish Parliament finally voted on Thursday to allow American warplanes fly through Turkish airspace to attack Iraq, but the Turkish government leaders took more than 24 hours to actually open it, another move that clearly infuriated American officials.

Both American and Turkish officials said today's delay was caused in large part by Turkish leaders' desire for an endorsement from the United States for Turkey to send its own troops into northern Iraq.

American officials have repeatedly urged Turkey not to do that, citing concerns that it could spark violence between Turkish troops and Kurds.

Continue reading the main story
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld reiterated that position today at a briefing in Washington and made no attempt to mask his pique with the Turkish government.

''You can be certain that we have advised the Turkish government and the Turkish armed forces that it would be notably unhelpful if they went into the north in large numbers,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

It was unclear late tonight if American warplanes had actually begun to fly over Turkey into Iraq, as they had long intended to.

Today's developments came after many hours of tense discussions between Turkish and American officials that culminated in a telephone conversation between Secretary of State Colin Powell and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Bush administration officials said the conversation failed to resolve the issue of Turkey's desire for its troops to go into northern Iraq. The officials said, however, that the United States was pleased that Turkey had agreed to allow American military overflights in the absence of an accord on the role of Turkish troops.

Other administration officials have said that the administration has many times told Turkey that should its forces go into northern Iraq, their work must be confined to helping refugees fleeing the war.

Turkey, however, has said that it would live by such a restriction only provided there is no uprising by Kurds that would pose a threat to Turkish sovereignty.

Just a month ago, American officials were hopeful for full military cooperation from Turkey, including permission to place American ground troops in southeastern Turkey and to move them from there into northern Iraq.

Continue reading the main story
But on March 1, the Turkish Parliament surprised many of those officials by rejecting that plan. The resolution that the Parliament passed on Thursday gave the United States only the authorization to fly aircraft over Turkey. It did not allow the United States to use aircraft based in Turkey or to use Turkish territory for refueling.

A senior American defense official said that several days ago, United States special operations forces in northern Iraq got into a bind and called for air support from American attack planes, but Turkish leaders would not open the country's airspace to American planes.

Although the forces were unharmed, the official said, leaders at the Pentagon were livid.

Exasperated by Turkey's refusal to consider allowing American troops through its territory into northern Iraq, the Pentagon has decided to divert about 40 ships carrying heavy tanks and combat equipment for the Army's Fourth Infantry Division to Kuwait from the eastern Mediterranean, two military officials said today.

Turkish officials contend that the United States has never fully appreciated the overwhelming public opposition to the war in Iraq or the Turkish government's concerns about the effects such a war could have on this country.

Turkish officials are concerned that the war could give rise to an independent Kurdish state in northern Iraq and rekindle separatist demands among the Kurdish population in southeastern Turkey.

Some of those Kurds waged a long, bloody campaign in the 1990's that left tens of thousands of people dead. During that battle, Turkey placed troops just inside Iraq to prevent Kurdish terrorists from coming into Turkey, and some of those troops are still there.

Turkey has repeatedly asked American officials to endorse the idea that Turkey might need to add to those troops, but American officials have refused.

Continue reading the main story
American and Turkish officials said that disagreement was not the only sticking point in Turkey opening its airspace. They said that Turkish officials wanted details about American military flights that the United States did not feel it should have to provide.

According to Western diplomats, the impasse was serious enough that Robert Pearson, the American ambassador to Turkey, met and talked with Turkish government officials from late Thursday night until 4 A.M. today.

The decision to open Turkish airspace most directly affects 50 attack planes that would fly from each of two American aircraft carriers, the Theodore Roosevelt and the Harry S. Truman, in the eastern 