
THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQI-AMERICANS; As War Starts, Refugees Feel a Mixture of Dread and Relief
By Jacques Steinberg
March 20, 2003

Hassan Hakkak has monitored the build-up to war in Iraq with more than passing interest.

Before fleeing Iraq for the United States in the late 1970's, Mr. Hakkak, 74, worked as a manager in the ministry of trade in Baghdad. There, he said, he was periodically jailed and beaten with a rifle butt by operatives of Saddam Hussein because he refused to join the ruling Baath Party. He said a cousin had been dragged away a quarter of a century ago for the same reason and -- judging from photos the family later received -- had been executed.

''I support Bush to kick out Saddam and his group,'' said Mr. Hakkak, a lean, compact man whose family owns two gas stations here.

But like many of the more than 300,000 Iraqis and their descendants who now live in the United States -- including about 60,000 clustered in Los Angeles and San Diego -- Mr. Hakkak agonizes about how an all-out United States attack could affect the siblings and cousins he left behind. He said he had received tearful phone calls in recent days from many of those relatives, who said they doubted they would survive a war and asked for his prayers.

''I don't support Iraqi civilians and American soldiers being killed,'' Mr. Hakkak said, sitting in a friend's living room and absently fingering an embroidered sofa under an oil painting of the shrine of Kazim in northern Baghdad. ''But I don't know how they can avoid it.''

Continue reading the main story
These last few days and weeks have been emotionally disorienting for Iraqi-Americans, most of whom moved to the United States in a steady stream beginning in the late 1960's, some fearing Mr. Hussein's government and others seeking a higher education. Though many now consider themselves more American than Iraqi -- ''My kids love McDonald's, Pizza Hut, Taco Bell, maybe too much,'' said Mr. Hakkak's son Mohammed, 34 -- they speak openly about their fears of being rounded into camps like Japanese-Americans in World War II.

Muhannad Eshaiker, 50, an architect from Baghdad who lives in Irvine, said his anxieties were hardly allayed when an F.B.I. agent in Washington called on Tuesday advising that someone from the agency would visit his home in the next few days as part of an effort to interview thousands of Iraqi-Americans.

''They were very polite,'' said Mr. Eshaiker, who described a similar telephone interview from the same agent two months before. ''They said it could come any time, even 2 a.m., because they had so many people to talk to in such a short window.''

Mr. Eshaiker said he was told that the government was seeking to enlist his help -- specifically in trying to identify any Iraqis in the United States who might support Mr. Hussein -- as well as to determine if he had received any threats as a result of being an Iraqi, and a Muslim, on the eve of war. He said he had not.

Nothing about the outward appearance of Mr. Eshaiker, or the dozen other Iraqi-Americans who gathered for dinner at a friend's home here on Tuesday night, suggests their Iraqi heritage to outsiders. Though some who live here -- as well as in another large community of Iraqis who live in Michigan -- are Christians or Jews, many others are Muslims who attend one of two predominantly Iraqi mosques in the area.

Continue reading the main story
What does stand out in conversation is what was called a longstanding Iraqi emphasis on higher education: many, including the women here, came to the United States to receive advanced degrees in medicine, dentistry, the law or engineering. The elder Mr. Hakkak received a master's degree in business administration from Northeast Missouri State University, and his wife, Sabiha, 60, received a bachelor's degree in English literature from the University of San Francisco.

To the extent that she has been singled out for discrimination, Mrs. Hakkak said, it is because of the black hijaab that covers her head. ''Some ignorant people are scared of a scarf,'' she said. ''They think it makes you a terrorist.''

If there is a thought that has given Iraqi-Americans cause for near-elation in recent weeks, it is President Bush's promise of ''regime change.'' Many Iraqis around the nation have prayed for years for such a development. All the Iraqi-Americans interviewed here could name at least one relative, and often several, who had been killed by Mr. Hussein's supporters.

Sermid D. Al-Sarraf, 38, a lawyer who was born in the United States but who moved to Baghdad for two years with his family in the late 1970's, said he was part of a committee that was working with the State Department to help create a new system of justice for Iraq. Another panel of expatriates, including some from California, has advised the Pentagon on the locations of historic and religious landmarks so they will not be bombed.

Mr. Al-Sarraf said he attended high school in Iraq for two years with Mr. Hussein's son Uday, whom he described as a frequent brawler who never received punishment, within school or outside it. Mr. Al-Sarraf said that other Iraqis were not so fortunate and that during his more than 30 years as president Mr. Hussein had amended the legal code to include capital offenses like publishing anything without government permission.

''It is incumbent that Saddam be brought to justice for the crimes against his people and against the Iranians and against the Kuwaitis,'' Mr. Al-Sarraf said.

But Mr. Al-Sarraf said he was firmly opposed to any long-term American occupation of Iraq as a means to accomplish those goals. ''In the end,'' he said, echoing others at the dinner, ''I hope the United States lives up to its own ideals in the region: liberty and democracy.''
