

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; No Veto Threat From Security Council Negotiations on Iraq, but No Resolution Either
By Julia Preston
Oct. 31, 2002

The first round of Iraq negotiations including both permanent and rotating Security Council members ended today without threats from France, Russia or China to use their veto or moves to confront Washington with competing resolutions.

But the 15 Council nations remained divided by as little, or as much, as two words: ''material breach.''

The seemingly picayune focus on these words has tried the patience of Bush administration officials who are ready to get on with disarming President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. But council diplomats agreed that the position of this phrase in the final resolution will determine if, when and how the United States will go to war to strip Iraq of its most lethal weapons.

Diplomats said the council nations broadly agreed that they wanted to tell Mr. Hussein that he has to surrender weapons of mass destruction to United Nations inspectors or face war. ''We're looking for a resolution which would be agreeable to all 15 members -- to achieve through inspections the full disarmament of Iraq,'' the ambassador from Ireland, Richard Ryan, said today. ''Full stop,'' he added for emphasis.


Continue reading the main story
''Material breach is a fact,'' Mr. Ryan added, although Ireland has been viewed as undecided in the debate.

The United States and its ally Britain proposed that the resolution should say that Iraq ''is still, and has been for a number of years, in material breach of its obligations under relevant resolutions.'' The other council members do not disagree, since weapons inspectors, who are required to monitor Iraq's arms programs under resolutions dating to 1991, have not been allowed to return to the country since 1998.

Yet French and Russian diplomats object to the phrase on the ground that if Iraq is already in breach of past resolutions, any nation on the council is empowered under the United Nations charter to take action, including military force, at any time to enforce compliance.

French officials worry that if the clause remains, the Bush administration will use it to go to war with Iraq even before new weapons inspections begin, or to respond with force to any Iraqi infraction of the inspections without consulting the Security Council. France wants to force the United States to come back to the council, after the inspections are under way, for a second round of decision-making if Mr. Hussein does not comply with the inspections.

In the diplomatic dance over the last two days, both France and Russia have dropped their objections to including these words, if they can be framed in a way that blunts their power to authorize immediate force. Ambassador Sergey Lavrov of Russia told the Council today that it was not the words that mattered but how they could be interpreted.

Continue reading the main story
United States diplomats said they would revise the draft to incorporate some of the council's suggestions. But they warned that the French proposal could seriously dilute the threat to Mr. Hussein, and insisted that the United States would not give up its prerogative to lead a military strike against Iraq when it chose.

Sensing that a compromise was within reach, American and French officials furiously exchanged bits of text looking for language that would allow both sides to say their concerns had been met.

In Washington, Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations biological and chemical weapons inspection team, and Muhammad el-Baradei, the chief atomic inspector, met today with President Bush and senior members of his foreign policy team, including Vice President Cheney; Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser; and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell.

Administration officials said the purpose of the meetings was to discuss ways to make inspections work, not to urge Mr. Blix to support the United States resolution.

''There's no point in sending the inspectors back into Iraq if the inspectors themselves don't think they can get their job done,'' Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, told reporters today. ''As the Security Council resolution is debated, it is healthy, it is wise, and it is fitting for the inspectors to meet with the members of the Security Council worldwide, including in the United States, to make certain that they have the tools they need to get their job done.''

Mr. Blix has said he hopes the United States and its allies will provide detailed intelligence reports to help the inspectors. United Nations and administration officials said that Mr. Bush seemed intent on sending the message today that he was prepared to provide that kind of assistance.

''We want to make sure that we're doing everything possible,'' said Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, ''because as the president said, military force is a last result.''

Continue reading the main story
Secretary Powell, asked about the meeting with the inspectors in an interview today on National Public Radio, said the president ''made it clear to them that we have confidence in them and that we are going to give them all the support we can so they can do their job.''

Secretary Powell said the inspections could take ''months'' to complete, a remark that seemed at odds with the administration's insistence that efforts to disarm Iraq not drag on for an extended period.

Asked later if his remarks meant that the United States would rule out military action while inspections were continuing, Secretary Powell said, ''There is nothing that we propose in this resolution or we would find acceptable in a resolution that would handcuff the president of the United States from doing what he feels he must do to defend the United States, defend our people and defend our interests in the world.

''We understand it will take time,'' Secretary Powell said. ''And the president understands that that means that we will have to wait for them to do their work and complete their reports.''
