

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE BORDER; An Iraqi Outpost Quietly Waits for War
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 16, 2003

The wind from the Persian Gulf, people here say, brings headaches. On a recent morning it began to blow, churning up a sandstorm that pitted windshields, tore at the plastic sheeting atop tomato fields, drew a beige curtain across the view south to Kuwait and whatever other headaches may come this way soon from the gulf.

''If they come, we will fight,'' said Ahmed Abed Ali, 31, an unarmed Iraqi soldier standing watch here perhaps 100 yards from Kuwait in Iraq's portion of the demilitarized border zone.

That is what everyone says, at least to foreign reporters, in Saddam Hussein's Iraq.

But people here in the six-mile-wide demilitarized strip of Iraqi borderland have a more immediate reason for defiance: just out of view, across Kuwait's own three miles of demilitarized desert, sit American and Kuwaiti tanks and soldiers, waiting.

Military experts agree that this strategic area -- south of the city of Basra, next to the port and the thin strip of land connecting Iraq to the gulf -- would be among the first targets for American troops in case of any attack.

Continue reading the main story
But curiously there is no sign here that Iraq is doing much to prepare itself militarily against an invasion. A stray tank or two can be seen farther north, off the road from Basra to Baghdad, but otherwise there is little evidence of any real military presence near the zone.

Despite what seems like an almost complete absence of defensive preparations, people here at the closest point to Kuwait do not say they are worried -- nor would it be wise to do so, even if they were.

Whether the American assault would come by sea, by land or by air, certainly no one here knows. But many who live in the demilitarized zone, administered by the United Nations since the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991, believe that it is coming, because they have seen and heard the signs, more than anywhere in Iraq.

More and more American and British warplanes, local people say, have been patrolling the skies recently, enforcing the no-flight zone in southern Iraq. Last month there was a series of live-fire exercises on the Kuwaiti side that loudly proclaimed the Bush administration's intent.

United States warplanes have also been raining thousands of leaflets on the area, as well as deeper in southern Iraq, providing radio frequencies for the American version of the debate over Iraqi compliance with the United Nations weapons inspections. Whether from fear or mere inattention, no one here will admit to having seen the leaflets, but Mr. Hussein himself did take notice.

Continue reading the main story
''Yes, your brothers in the armed forces hold some kind of celebrations after they gather these leaflets and burn them, chanting slogans as they disperse the ashes of these leaflets,'' he told soldiers, chomping on a cigar, in one of his many recent television appearances to rally Iraqi troops.

That determination, or perhaps, bravado, was echoed by Fadil Abbas, 45, general manager of the local headquarters of Mr. Hussein's governing Baath Party, who said: ''We will never move from here. We will defend our land until the last man is standing.''

But if past fights here are any indication of what may come, the people who live inside the Iraqi side of the 125-mile-long zone -- some 30,000 of them here and in the equally sandy town of Safwan -- cannot be feeling confident.

To the southeast of Basra, on the Fao Peninsula, overseen by three United Nations observation posts, lie the skeletons of some of the tens of thousands of Iraqi and Iranian soldiers who died in one of the principal battlefields of their war in the 1980's.

Near Jebel Sanam, a hill some 450 feet high and the only real rise along the border, Iraqi tanks and troop carriers were hit by American bombs and missiles in the last hours of the 1991 war.

They still sit, rusted and dusty, a monument to what Iraqis often tell visiting delegations was the brutality of the Americans. Nearby is the Iraqi end of the so-called Road of Death, where American planes also bombed Iraqi vehicles fleeing from the occupation of Kuwait.

''Yes, I see the tanks,'' said Nejma Abed, 35, who runs a little grocery in the desert selling canned goods and the famed dates of Basra a few hundred yards away from the tank cemetery near here.

Continue reading the main story
But she said this daily reminder of so much destruction did not mean much. No one, she said, has made plans to leave, even though she hears on the radio that war may be coming, and not far from her home.

''It's our land,'' she said. ''We can't leave our land.''

It is an unsettled land to live in, even without the threat of a new war. Sheep and sometimes shepherds still set off old land mines. Occasionally Iraqis trying to flee to Kuwait set them off too. Even when they manage to walk or drive through the zone safely, the would-be refugees are usually picked up by United Nations patrols, which return them to Iraq.

Tomato farmers, who nurture bright patches of plastic-covered green in the middle of the desert, complain that the depleted uranium from American bombs dropped last time has destroyed the soil and reduced their yields.

American technology is one of the few subjects that seems to give Iraqis pause. They cannot compete, they say, and if indeed Iraq does intend to defend itself strongly, people here say they hope the decisive battle is on the ground, not in the air.

''Why don't they use their soldiers first, and not planes?'' asked one of the tomato farmers, Muttar Oeali, 39, a farmer who fought in the gulf war. ''Then we will show them our fight.''
