

THREATS AND RESPONSES: OUTSIDE BAGHDAD; Kurds Keep a Wary Eye on the Iraq Border, Open for Now
By C. J. Chivers
Dec. 3, 2002

Najhat Hossein wandered the parched grass, clucking at the sheep and goats he tends and watching Iraqi soldiers nearby. The soldiers sat in trenches. Now and then, a few would stand and silhouette themselves in the midday sun.

The shepherd was careful to keep just beyond Iraqi rifle range. But he hardly worried about being shot. ''Usually the soldiers who come down from there are not armed,'' he said. ''Sometimes they ask me for food, a little yogurt or bread.''

Mr. Hossein stood squarely in the militarized zone between Iraq proper and the autonomous Kurdish enclave in the nation's northern mountains, which is out of Saddam Hussein's control.

Here, near the busy Kurdish city of Sulaimaniya, a region of broken brown hills is bisected by a four-lane highway that drops to a plateau perhaps a mile wide. On one side of the plateau sits the forward element of the I Corps of the Iraqi Army. On the other are Kurdish border guards and a few bunkers of their own.

Continue reading the main story
In theory, the flatlands are a contested no-man's zone, a front watched over by opposing armies. In practice, the area is guarded as much by intuition as by arms. Chamchamal is well south of the northern no-flight zone maintained by British and American aircraft. Without coordinated air support or modern antitank weapons, both of which the Kurds lack, the 30-minute drive from here to Sulaimaniya is almost indefensible against armored assault. The best the lightly armed Kurdish fighters could hope to achieve in the event of an attack would be a delaying action, which might give civilians time to flee.

But for the moment the Kurds think the possibility of an Iraqi advance is remote. Although Saddam Hussein has attacked them many times in the past, the Kurds say he is now engaged in diplomatic chess, busy with United Nations weapons inspectors, not eager to provoke. He also has little reason to discourage trade and traffic across the front, from which Iraq profits.

Even as Kurds predict that Mr. Hussein will lose this chess game, and face war before next spring, they keep their own lines thinly defended. It is especially true now, in the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, when fasting troops go home at 1 p.m., leaving only shepherds like Mr. Hossein between their homes and the enemy.

''We do sometimes have small skirmishes, but the front is mostly quiet,'' said Faraidoon Abdulkader, minister of the interior in the Kurdish eastern zone.

What passes for fighting these days between Iraq and its Kurdish opposition is often symbolic. Last week, the Iraqis fired a mortar barrage at another checkpoint after an Iraqi colonel defected to the opposition. The rounds landed harmlessly. To the Kurds, each errant explosion seemed more a message of frustration than a military act.

Continue reading the main story
Kurds say the Iraqis have another reason to keep border tension low. There are six crossing points, through which people from both sides pass for family visits, medical appointments and the like. Each contact provides an opportunity for graft. The Iraqi troops do not want to discourage the flow.

Mr. Hossein, tending sheep directly in front of the Iraqi positions, for example, worried about soldiers acting as rustlers, not riflemen. ''Twenty days ago some of them came from trenches and took sheep from my friend by force,'' he said.

Iraqi troops sometimes demand food, travelers today said, or shake down people seeking to cross. Together, the anecdotes tell of an army suffering from poor discipline and meager supply.

''The guy at the checkpoint asked me to give him a coat,'' said a man who crosses frequently, and asked that his name not be used because he fears retaliation. ''How can I give him a coat? I live in Iraq. I cannot afford a new coat for myself.''

Another traveler, whose grinning son reached under his car seat to reveal a hidden case of jelly, said Iraqi soldiers seemed to search his car for things to steal, rather than for weapons or other prohibited equipment. ''I am lucky because I am an old man and they did not search me very much,'' he said.

Inside the Kurdish checkpoint, Sgt. Ibrahim Aziz checked identification cards of people coming from Iraq. One man was going to see his sick brother in Sulaimaniya. He said he had had to pay a bribe of about $10 to cross. Ten dollars is a huge sum in Iraq.

''My brother is ill, and he sent a message for me to visit him,'' he said. ''How can I not?''

Quiet as it may be, Kurdish officials cautioned that the two sides could quickly organize for a fight. Both forces, through long familiarity with the terrain and networks of spies, keep thorough watch over their enemy, and know the whereabouts of each other's bunkers, garrisons and equipment.

Continue reading the main story
Back in his office in Sulaimaniya, Mr. Abdulkader was able to describe new Iraqi fortifications in detail, as well as the movement of missiles into three positions west of Kirkuk, the city where Iraq's I Corps is headquartered. ''Our network is wide and it is deep,'' he said.

The Iraqis demonstrated their own intimacy with the terrain in 1996. In a brief incursion into Sulaimaniya, they captured and executed opposition officials with chilling precision. Accounts from that time describe gunmen who navigated alleys as if they knew exactly where to go.

Signs of such bellicosity remain, apparent in bullet marks in some buildings along the road, and in a shipping container a few hundred yards in front of the last Kurdish checkpoint. It has been thoroughly ventilated by shrapnel. ''Our checkpoint used to be there,'' Sergeant Aziz said. ''But they shelled it so many times we had to move back.''
