

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | FIRST MARINE DIVISION; Warily, Iraqis Get Acquainted With Marines
By John Kifner
March 31, 2003

The crowd, hundreds of men, milled about uncertainly on the long, shabby main street late this afternoon as the marines' armored vehicles, machine guns swiveling, pulled into town.

A man named Khalid, a civil engineer clutching a baby boy, stepped forward hesitantly. ''This town is a peace town,'' he said in English. ''No have any guns, no guns.''

Capt. Aaron Robertson, the leader of the American patrol, one of the very first to enter an Iraqi town in this manner, began speaking to him earnestly.

''We're here to help,'' the captain began. ''I have kids just like you. All we want to do is to help you get away from this regime.''

Continue reading the main story

There was a rapid burst of Arabic and the unit's interpreter, Cpl. Dory Hibachi, listened intently.

''Oh, he's scared we're going to pull out like we did the first time,'' he told the captain, referring to the withdrawal of American support for Shiite and Kurdish uprisings against the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, at the end of the first Persian Gulf war in 1991. The uprisings were then met with brutal reprisals.

But soon the men -- they were all men -- began warming to their visitors, smiling and cheering -- and asking for help.

''Kahrabaa, kahrabaa,'' the men shouted repeatedly, using the Arabic word for electricity, pointing to the overhead wires and demanding the town's power be turned back on. They asked, too, for food and water.

The encounter in this town of 20,000 people by a small river -- officials asked that it not be named for security reasons -- marked what appeared to be a sharp change in the tactics of the marines, whose rapid advance toward Baghdad has been slowed by ambushes and harassing attacks along the road.

It also suggested that, beneath the controlling hand of Mr. Hussein's repressive government, there lurks some positive sentiment toward American forces, however tentative, however tainted by bitter memories.

Continue reading the main story
Maj. Paul Konopka, the civil affairs officer of the First Regimental Combat Team, said that two local men told the marines where the local Baath Party headquarters, its arms cache and the houses of its leaders were situated.

Teams of scouts and snipers watched the locations and last night the headquarters were raided. Large amounts of arms and records were seized and 27 prisoners were taken with no casualties.

Five big truckloads of arms and ammunition were dumped in the river last night, said Lt. Col. Greg Stevens, executive officer of the reserve infantry battalion from California that carried out the raid.

The stores of ammunition piled up near his troops today -- stacks of plastic-wrapped 80-millimeter mortar rounds, American-made C-4 explosives and piles of aging Kalashnikov rifles -- represented only about a tenth of the total, he said. The local Baath leader, known as Abu Yassin, escaped however.

There were three or four other such incidents today, senior Marine officers said. Preparations were being made for a raid tonight on what was described at the headquarters of a number of regional Baath Party leaders.

''People are beginning to rat them out,'' Brig. Gen. John F. Kelly, assistant commander of the First Marine Division, said tonight describing what he hoped was a shift in attitude among the population. ''It's happening increasingly.''

But it was clear from what the Iraqis said as they tentatively welcomed the Americans today that the worried civil engineer's question -- would the Americans stay this time? -- weighed heavily on their minds as they considered whether to change or choose sides.

Continue reading the main story
''Don't make the mistake of 1991,'' said a man in the crowd named Hussein, sidling up to an American. ''People blame the U.S.A. because they prevent the uprising of 1991 and let Saddam kill people. There are 60 people gone from this town, and until today their families do not know whether they are in jail or dead.''

Initially, the marines' tactic was to drive swiftly to Baghdad along with Army and allied units and unseat Mr. Hussein's government. But the advance has been slowed, not only by a devastating two-day sandstorm that wreaked havoc with convoys, but also by ambushes mounted by Baath Party loyalists inside the towns and cities bypassed by the Marines.

The marines are practicing ''liberation tactics,'' General Kelly said, meaning they are trying to avoid killing people, destroying infrastructure or harming agricultural animals.

Now this approach might be extended to providing food, medicine and other aid to the towns. Paint might also be provided so that the ubiquitous portraits of Mr. Hussein could be obscured.

In speaking to Marines of all ranks, it is impossible not to be struck by their conviction of their liberating mission.

''That's what we're here for, to free the Iraqi people,'' said Sgt. Maj. Jon Barter, in remarks echoed in nearly every conversation in the camp.

''As war fighters, we want to believe that we are here to do good and free the Iraqi people. We want to feel as liberators.''

Continue reading the main story
But how widely this view would be shared by Iraqis was still uncertain.

The waves and cheers grew tentative on the main street. There were constant reminders and remarks among the crowd about what was seen as the American abandonment in 1991. And farther back in the crowd were a handful of unsmiling, hard-faced, better-dressed young men who curtly declined to speak to Americans. One officer spotted a pistol under one of the men's sports coats.

''The people are still afraid of Saddam, the number of them talking is very small,'' said the interpreter, a Marine corporal who himself fled Iraq after the failed revolt. ''They are curious about us, they ask are we actually going to go through with this, or are you going to leave us hanging?''
