

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE WHITE HOUSE; Bush Warns Hussein Again But Sidesteps Any 'Deadline'
By Serge Schmemann
Jan. 15, 2003

President Bush said yesterday that ''time is running out on Saddam Hussein'' to avert an American-led attack by disarming voluntarily. But the president issued no specific deadline, while Washington's allies reinforced demands that any military action must be approved by the United Nations.

''I am sick and tired of games and deception, and that is my view on timetables,'' Mr. Bush said before meeting with the Polish president, Aleksander Kwasniewski. ''The United Nations has spoken with one voice. He's been given 11 years to disarm, and we have given him one last chance.''

Mr. Bush's tough talk intensified the controversy surrounding Jan. 27, the date when United Nations weapons inspectors are to report to the Security Council on the first 60 days of their search for chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programs in Iraq.

Last week the chief inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, told the Security Council that they had found no ''smoking gun'' showing the existence of such programs, but also that the documentation provided by Iraq failed to answer many critical questions.


Initially, the Bush administration indicated that the Jan. 27 report would mark the start of a ''final phase'' leading to a decision on whether to begin military action.

But officials have since played down the date as a trigger for war. On Monday the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said Mr. Bush had no ''exact timetable'' for war; yesterday Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said Jan. 27, while ''a very important date,'' was ''not the end of an inspection process.''

As the inspections debate unfolds, the United States continues to build up its invasion force. Last weekend Mr. Bush authorized the transfer of 62,000 more troops to the Persian Gulf. About 50,000 soldiers are already there, and 25,000 are in transit.

While the Bush administration has continued to mount pressure on Mr. Hussein, European governments have become increasingly vocal in their insistence that any military action must be preceded by a new Security Council resolution.

Washington has suggested that Iraq's failure to abide by the last resolution, No. 1441, is sufficient ground for an attack. The resolution was adopted Nov. 8 and threatened Iraq with ''serious consequences'' if it lied about its weapons of mass destruction or failed to cooperate with United Nations inspectors.

Continue reading the main story
Secretary General Kofi Annan also declared yesterday at a news conference that Resolution 1441 envisaged a second resolution if Iraq failed to act. Asked whether he would approve military action if Iraq defied the United Nations, Mr. Annan said, ''I don't think we are there yet, so I don't want to talk about war, nor is the Council talking about war.''

Mr. Annan said he remained ''both optimistic and hopeful'' that a war could be averted if ''the pressure on the Iraqi leadership is maintained and the inspectors continue to work as aggressively as they are doing.'' He said he had been in touch with ''quite a lot of the leaders in the region'' to urge them to persuade President Hussein to disarm.

In Paris yesterday for a meeting with President Jacques Chirac, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder reiterated that Germany hoped war could be averted, but that if it could not be, his country would not take part. Mr. Chirac, who has insisted that any military action be undertaken with a clear United Nations mandate but has not said France will not participate, said the French and German positions on Iraq were the same.

Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin of France told his Parliament yesterday, ''If there is going to be use of force, there will have to be a deliberation other than that for 1441, because the source of international law essential for us is at the U.N. and the Security Council.''

Even Britain, which has been staunchly behind the United States in its pressure on Iraq, has suggested that Jan. 27 should not be regarded as a trigger for war, and that a new resolution is desirable. In an interview with BBC Radio, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said the British government had two ''preferences.''

''One is that we have a second Security Council resolution, which we want,'' he said. ''The second preference is that if military action is required, that we have a substantive vote in the House of Commons before action takes place.''

Public opinion surveys in Britain show that only about 13 percent of the public supports military action by the United States and Britain alone, but that 53 percent would back it if the United Nations endorsed it.

Continue reading the main story
Washington is pressing the arms inspectors to bring Iraqi scientists and engineers out of the country so they can testify without fear of reprisals. But both Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei have stressed that they have no means of bringing such people out against their will.

Mr. Blix, who heads the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, and Dr. ElBaradei, director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, have stayed clear of the debate on military action, declaring that this was a political decision for the Security Council. But both have indicated that their work will require more time. They are to visit Iraq next week.

Dr. ElBaradei arrived in Moscow yesterday for talks with Russian officials. ''I think it is very important that Iraq cooperate as fully as possible,'' he said on arrival. ''That will enable us to come to positive conclusions before we report to the Security Council on Jan. 27.''

Iraq insists that the 12,000-page report it submitted to the United Nations in December answered all the outstanding questions about its programs for developing weapons of mass destruction. Dr. ElBaradei and Mr. Blix reported last week that the report was ''rich in volume but poor in new information.''
