

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Inspectors Urge Iraq to Document Arms Claims
By Sam Dillon
Nov. 20, 2002

United Nations arms inspectors, meeting with senior Iraqi officials in Baghdad, urged them today to do some soul-searching about their repeated assertions that they are not hiding weapons of mass destruction, and to produce documentation to back up those claims.

''The production of mustard gas is not like the production of marmalade,'' Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector, told reporters after meeting with the Iraqi officials, The Associated Press reported. ''You're supposed to keep some track of what you produce. There must be documentation, records of what was produced.''

One of the Iraqi officials, Foreign Minister Naji Sabri, said that to comply with the terms of the resolution, Iraq would submit a declaration to the United Nations team on Dec. 8 covering biological, nuclear and chemical weapons.

As the first United Nations arms inspection mission in four years prepared to begin operations in Iraq, the United Nations and the Bush administration disagreed over whether Iraq had violated a Security Council resolution by firing on United States and British aircraft on Monday over the no-flight zones in northern and southern Iraq.

The White House said that by shooting at the planes, Iraq had breached the resolution, but Secretary General Kofi Annan took the opposite view in statements to reporters traveling with him in Kosovo today. ''I don't think that the Council will say this is in contravention of the resolution of the Security Council,'' Mr. Annan said.

One Bush administration official shrugged off Mr. Annan's comments. ''What he said reflects his personal view about how a Security Council vote would go,'' the official said, while acknowledging that Washington stands alone among Council members in its interpretation. ''There's a longstanding disagreement among the U.S. and other Security Council members about the status of the no-fly zones.''

On Monday, Bush administration officials portrayed Iraq's recent attempts to shoot down United States and British aircraft over the zones as a ''material breach'' of the Nov. 8 Security Council resolution authorizing the new arms inspections.

Diplomats here said the administration's interpretation pitted it against the other 14 states of the 15-member Council. But the United States position did not jeopardize the Council's basic unity around the goal of getting the inspections under way, the diplomats said, because neither the United States nor any other government would bring up the dispute for formal debate.

Still, the issue foreshadows other, more serious disputes that could erupt over similarly ambiguous language in the resolution if the United States attempts to move militarily against Iraq without gaining the Security Council's explicit approval, the diplomats said.

Continue reading the main story
Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said the United States reserved the right to take the issue of the no-flight zones to the Security Council but had ''no immediate plans'' to do so.

''That's always a serious incident, any time anybody fires on American planes,'' Mr. Fleischer told reporters as he flew to Prague today with President Bush. ''It's a material breach of the United Nations resolutions. It can endanger the lives of American and British who patrol to enforce the no-fly zone.''

The dispute about the meaning of Resolution 1441, which authorizes the arms inspections now getting under way, underlined the ambiguity of several clauses that allowed 15 member states with views on Iraq as diverse as the United States, Russia, China and Syria, to vote unanimously on Nov. 8 for its approval.

''This resolution allowed all sides to stick to their convictions and still say they won the argument,'' a diplomat said today.

The no-flight zones over northern and southern Iraq were established by the United States, Britain and France after the Persian Gulf war. The Security Council never explicitly approved the flights over the zones, and Baghdad considers them a violation of its sovereignty.

The Nov. 8 resolution forbids Iraq from taking hostile acts directed against any member state enforcing the resolution, but does not mention the no-flight zones specifically. During the negotiations that preceded its passage, American diplomats submitted a draft resolution with language specifying that Iraqi attempts to defend the zones from foreign aircraft would constitute a breach, diplomats said today. But Washington erased those and all other references to the zones from the draft after several nations objected, the diplomats said.

China disagreed today with the White House's interpretation of the resolution. ''As far as China is concerned, we do not see the point that we have the no-fly zones, because that's never been the Security Council's resolution,'' said China's United Nations ambassador, Wan Yingfan.

Continue reading the main story
In Moscow, Reuters quoted the Russian Foreign Ministry as saying today, ''Recent claims that Iraq's actions in the no-fly zones can be seen as a violation of the U.N. Security Council resolution 1441 have no legal grounds.''

The diplomatic dispute did not slow the activities of the inspection team, which arrived in Baghdad on Monday and met today with Mr. Sabri and an adviser to President Saddam Hussein, Gen. Amir al-Saadi.

Mr. Blixsaid after the encounter that he had urged the Iraqis to provide documents proving that they have no more weapons of mass destruction.

''We have tried to impress on them they must look into their stocks and stores and see if there's something they should declare,'' Mr. Blix told reporters in Baghdad late Tuesday, The A. P. reported. He said full-scale inspections would begin in ''about a week.''

Accompanying Mr. Blix in the meeting was Mohamed ElBaradei, director of the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency. Mr. ElBaradei, speaking in Arabic after the meeting, said that the Iraqis had cooperated with the inspection mission so far and had promised to continue. ''We hope that this oral commitment will be translated into fact when we begin inspections,'' he said.
