

The World; To Iran, Iraq May Be The Greater Satan
By Elaine Sciolino
Nov. 3, 2002

PRESIDENT BUSH'S vision for Iraq is a bit like that of the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the father of Iran's revolution. After Iraq invaded Iran in 1980, the ayatollah described Saddam Hussein as part of an evil alliance, calling him ''a pro-American mercenary'' and ''an infidel'' and urging the Iraqi people to overthrow him.

''If you can kill Saddam before we execute him, stab him in the back!'' he told Iraqis. ''Paralyze the economy! Stop paying taxes! This is a war between Islam and blasphemy!''

After Mr. Hussein withdrew most of his troops and declared a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war in 1982, the ayatollah rejected it, vowing to install an Iranian-style Islamic republic in Baghdad. It was 1988, the year before he died, that he gave up trying.

In their public stance today, the Iranians are being a lot more circumspect about changing Iraq's regime by force, now that the country proposing to do so is the United States. So as Americans prepare for war against Iraq, a huge question looms: Can the United States and Iran work together, or can they at least stay out of each other's way? Whatever their animosities, history suggests that the two sides know how to dance around each other in the shadows, making it possible that each can work toward mutual goals while never acknowledging cooperating with the other.

Continue reading the main story
In any action to disarm Iraq, the preference of the Bush administration, as officials have long described it, would be not only to rid Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction, but also to rid it of President Hussein. Various administration officials have spoken of installing a government that reflects the will of the Iraqi people and conforms to Washington's vision of what a modern Middle Eastern nation should look like.

Is that offensive to Iran? On the surface, of course. But in the shadows, perhaps not.

Last week, Iran's president, Mohammad Khatami, was in Madrid reiterating Tehran's official line: Iran is vehemently opposed to any war against Iraq, only the Iraqi people can determine their destiny, and ''if there is a war, we can take no sides and help no one.''

But other voices in Iran have begun suggesting that an American invasion might not be such a bad thing.

Mr. Khatami's brother, Mohammad Reza Khatami, deputy speaker of Iran's parliament and a voice of the reformist constituency that brought the president to power, said a few weeks ago, ''The day that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein is toppled will be among the happiest days for the Iranian people, no matter how this occurs.''

Jafar Golbaz, a deputy in parliament, went further: ''It will be the happiest day for all Iranians to see Saddam toppled, no matter by whom. Tehran may even decide to cooperate with the United States if it receives assurances that its interests will be respected.''

Continue reading the main story
So what will Iran do if war comes? President Khatami, despite his statements to the Europeans that a unilateral war to topple Mr. Hussein would destabilize the whole region, also suggested that Iran would not oppose any decision by the Security Council. He said in Madrid that there should be support from the United Nations if ''there need to be further steps taken.''

In fact, Iran has done just fine by sitting on the sidelines when Iraq was threatened before. In 1990, it refrained from interfering with the American-led coalition that expelled Iraq from Kuwait. It ignored American violations of its air space along its western border with Iraq and did not retaliate when American missiles inadvertently fell on its side of the border.

Even more significant was Iran's decision not to get involved after the war, when Iraqi Shiite Muslims in the south and Iraqi Kurds in the north rose up against Mr. Hussein. One argument raised in Washington against going to war with Mr. Hussein is that war could ignite a Shiite rebellion that the Shiites of Iran could use to dismember Iraq.

But Iran, like Iraq's other neighbors, fears the instability such a dismemberment would bring to the border, to oil markets and to Iraq's majority Shiite population, who are Arabs, not Persians.

Similarly, in the American-led war against Afghanistan, Iran benefited by doing less, rather than more, despite its antipathy for the Taliban. It gave support to the American-backed Northern Alliance and cooperated in creating a new government in Kabul. While some American officials have said Iran harbors Al Qaeda, Iranian officials say their country, with the help of American intelligence data, has rounded up and expelled 250 Qaeda members.

If Americans pour into Iraq and stay to shape a government, Iran will almost certainly want some say about the outcome, if only because it wants to avoid feeling encircled. American influence is already strong in Afghanistan to the east; Pakistan to the southeast; the gulf Arab states to the south. Even Russia counts itself an American ally.

But fear of encirclement has not prevented the Iranians from working with the Americans on Iraq.

When the administration organized a meeting of the six main Iraqi opposition groups in Washington in August, a representative of Ayatollah Mohammad Bakir al-Hakim, a senior Iraqi Shiite cleric living in Iran, was at the table. Meanwhile, Iran's navy is quietly cooperating with American vessels in the Persian Gulf, channeling boats suspected of smuggling Iraqi oil and dates away from Iran's shores so Americans can intercept them.

''We are condemned to be neighbors,'' Iran's foreign minister, Kamal Kharrazi, once said of Iran and Iraq, meaning that Iran will have to coexist with whatever regime is in power in Baghdad. These days, at least a few Iranians seem to be suggesting much the same about America.
