

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; U.N. Set to Move In Quickly To Seek Iraq Nuclear Arms
By Julia Preston
Nov. 11, 2002

United Nations atomic experts have finished detailed plans for a ''full court press'' of fast-moving inspections that will quickly uncover any major nuclear weapons program Iraq has undertaken in the last four years, according to Mohamed ElBaradei, the head of the nuclear team.

While Mr. ElBaradei said he was confident he would find ''all large components'' of nuclear weapons work in Iraq, he cautioned that his inspectors could face difficulties detecting smuggled nuclear materials and will need help from other governments. He said it could take several months to assess evidence the Bush administration has provided to support its claims that Iraq is trying to build a nuclear weapon.

''We are going to use every weapon in our diplomatic inspection arsenal to make sure that if there was any breach, we can detect it and detect it early,'' said Mr. ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, in an interview Friday, when the Security Council unanimously approved a resolution giving the inspectors enhanced authority.

''We are going to be tough,'' he said. ''We will not tolerate any cat-and-mouse.''

Mr. ElBaradei will travel to Baghdad on Nov. 18 with Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations chemical, biological and long-range missile inspections team. The inspectors have been barred by Iraq since they withdrew in December 1998, on the eve of American and British bombing raids to punish Baghdad's failures to cooperate with the inspectors.

Bush administration officials have said they will be watching the inspectors' every move, ready to go to the Security Council to call for war against Saddam Hussein at the first sign that he is cheating or obstructing the inspectors' work. But while the United States and Britain, the co-authors of the resolution, see the inspections as a trigger for war, other Security Council members are hoping they will force Iraq to disarm and lead to peace.

Up to now, Mr. ElBaradei, who is based in Vienna, has stayed in the background as Mr. Blix talked to the Security Council and reporters, even though the two chiefs have equal authority. But as the inspections get under way, Mr. ElBaradei becomes a key figure for the Bush administration.

In a report in February 1999, the atomic agency said its inspections to that point ''revealed no indication'' that Iraq had a nuclear weapon or retained ''any practical capability'' to make fuel. Iraq is only allowed to have very limited amounts of radioactive isotopes for medical treatment and agricultural uses.

President Bush has charged that Mr. Hussein reactivated his nuclear program, employing many scientists and technicians and withholding key information about procurement and foreign assistance. Mr. Bush warned that if Iraq acquired fissile material, it could build a weapon within a year.

Mr. ElBaradei said he would arrive in Iraq with about 10 atomic experts, and a week later start building the team to about 25 inspectors. They will move quickly to revisit sites they examined previously, he said, to see whether old surveillance systems remain in place and to set up environmental sampling to test for radioactivity.

Continue reading the main story
He said that he would need up to three months to set up a broader plan of work based on programs that Iraq declares and suspicions the inspectors may have about hidden activity.

He said that he and Mr. Blix expect to have latitude to make judgments about Iraq's cooperation, suggesting that their standards might be more flexible than the administration's.

The inspectors will not be alarmed by ''a minor omission'' in Iraq's weapons declaration, Mr. ElBaradei said. ''We will be guided by the definition of material breach, which is really a major violation of the very purpose of the process.''

Mr. ElBaradei said it is virtually impossible for Iraq to conceal an advanced nuclear weapons program, because it requires large industrial sites and emits radioactivity. But it will be hard for inspectors to discover if Iraq has smuggled in small amounts of uranium or plutonium.

''The difficult part would be if Iraq were to import nuclear material from abroad, across the border, that would be a real challenge to our system,'' Mr. ElBaradei said. He is appealing for intelligence data any country might have about black market nuclear trading with Iraq.

The atomic chief predicted that evaluating information provided by the Bush administration about Iraq's attempt to buy aluminum tubes, which the president cited as the most damning evidence of Iraq's nuclear ambitions, would be a complex job. While he is expecting more details from Washington, he said he did not yet know if the tubes went to Iraq, and he remained unsure if they were for nuclear development. ''Our assessment is that they could have been used for conventional rockets in addition to being used for uranium enrichment,'' he said.

During the Security Council's heated negotiations over the resolution, Mr. ElBaradei, an Egyptian, reached out to the Arab world to defend the inspections, and conducted a long interview with Al Jazeera, the Arabic-language television station. ''The Arab world must understand that there is a problem in Iraq, and it is not because Iraq is an Arab country,'' he said. ''It is because Iraq has not fulfilled its obligations with regard to disarmament.''

The new resolution, he stresses, has language -- albeit deeply buried -- that holds out the prospect to Baghdad of an end to economic sanctions within a year if Mr. ElBaradei and Mr. Blix give their approval. But Mr. ElBaradei expects his word to carry weight in the Middle East if he says that Mr. Hussein balked. ''I think they will probably listen to me, because I will speak to them in their own language,'' he said.
