

Maine Race Is Focused On Region, Not on Iraq
By Adam Clymer
Oct. 4, 2002

For all the talk in Washington about war with Iraq, some Congressional races out in the country are focused on local issues and the economy. One is here in Northern Maine's Second District, where it did not take the latest recession to put people out of work.

State Senator Michael H. Michaud, the Democratic candidate, boasted of his 28 years' membership in the paper workers' union in East Millinocket (and 22 in the Legislature in Augusta), as he warmed up union workers who were about to go knocking on doors Saturday. He called for an increase in the minimum wage and prescription drug benefits under Medicare and denounced trade agreements like Nafta.

Mr. Michaud said that the claims made by his Republican opponent, Kevin L. Raye, to the independence Maine cherishes were phony, because he takes ''a million dollars in Republican money for TV ads.''

Mr. Raye, a longtime aide to Senator Olympia J. Snowe here and in Washington, welcomed the endorsement of the National Federation of Independent Business in Bangor on Friday. He said that aggressive foreign marketing of Maine products, improved transportation and getting a bigger share of the federal pie would create and keep good jobs.

He blamed high state taxes for the loss of jobs, and said that Mr. Michaud, president of the State Senate, had always voted with labor and helped create a bad business climate.

Democrats and the A.F.L.-C.I.O. say the district has lost 20,000 jobs since the North American Free Trade Agreement was enacted in 1994.

Iraq seems to be an issue only when a reporter asks about it. Voters hardly ever raise it.

Mr. Michaud told a news conference in Lewiston on Thursday that President Bush had not made an adequate case for war, and added, ''President Bush has been using the Iraq issue to build momentum for Republican candidates.''

Mr. Raye is less decisive, saying in an interview, ''There is a great sense among the people that this is not an ideal situation -- to go it alone.'' He said Mr. Bush's father ''set a good example'' by assembling an alliance before the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

Abortion is a more visible issue. Mr. Michaud generally opposes abortion, while Mr. Raye generally supports abortion rights, as did the district's last three representatives: John Baldacci, the Democratic incumbent who is vacating the seat to run for governor; Senator Snowe; and her Republican predecessor William S. Cohen. ''A pro-life candidate has never won here,'' Mr. Raye said.

Continue reading the main story
But while each candidate has received contributions from abortion interest groups, neither sounds like a true believer to a cause.

Mr. Raye favors a ban on all abortions after a fetus could live outside the womb if an exception is made for the physical health of the mother. Mr. Michaud says he opposes a constitutional amendment overturning Roe v. Wade and the anti-abortion limitations the Bush administration has put on family planning programs here and abroad. But in 1998 he answered a Maine Right to Life Committee questionnaire to say he favored ''legislation that would prevent abortion, except to prevent the death of the mother.''

Several local polls have shown Mr. Michaud with a lead, though one no larger than the surveys' margins of sampling error. The Raye camp does not dispute the polls, but maintains they result from the Democrat's greater name recognition, and insist the gap will close. Until he won the nomination in May, Mr. Raye said, ''I was virtually invisible.''

With Representatives J. Dennis Hastert, the House speaker, and Richard A. Gephardt, the minority leader, each scheduled for a campaign stop, the national political parties are heavily invested in this campaign. So is the A.F.L.-C.I.O.

For all the advantages of incumbency, open seats like this one are where most party changes take place, as they did in 1994 when Ms. Snowe ran for the Senate and Mr. Baldacci succeeded her. So, if the Republicans can overcome Mr. Michaud's lead and retake the seat, it would help them prevent a Democratic takeover of the House.

Christian P. Potholm, professor of government at Bowdoin College just outside the district, said the race between two appealing candidates was very much in doubt. Neither had worked hard enough, he said, to broaden his appeal.

The ''national liberal Democratic agenda'' would get Mr. Michaud only 45 percent of the vote, Dr. Potholm said, but he needed to reach beyond it. He said that Mr. Michaud's record at Augusta, including sponsorship of prescription drug legislation, assured him of union support and that he now had to reach beyond it.

Continue reading the main story
Dr. Potholm said that Senator Snowe's backing was important for Mr. Raye, whose slogan is ''Ready on Day One'' because of his experience as her chief of staff. But he said Mr. Raye still had to ''get out of that chrysalis of a staffer'' and show himself as a leader in his own right.

Social Security is not the issue here that it is elsewhere. While Mr. Michaud lumps his opponent with Republicans in Washington who have favored putting some Social Security payments into private accounts, Republicans are running a commercial accusing Mr. Michaud of seeking to tax its benefits. His proposal, which was vetoed by Gov. Angus King, would have subjected high-income taxpayers to Maine income taxes on Social Security benefits, just as they are taxed by the federal government.

Mr. Raye argues that his experience as a local aide in Bangor and then in Washington is the ideal mix for a congressman. Mr. Michaud scoffed: ''He has no record at all. Staffers don't have to make the tough decisions when it comes to vote -- or to compromise.''
