

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DISSENT; Tens of Thousands March Against Iraq War
By Eric Lichtblau
March 16, 2003

In what many saw as a last chance to head off military action, tens of thousands of antiwar protesters marched in several demonstrations around the country today in opposition to the Bush administration's policy on Iraq.

In Washington, just hours after President Bush said in his weekly radio address that he saw little chance that Iraq would disarm without the use of force, throngs of protesters armed with banners and bullhorns implored Mr. Bush to abandon a possible war.

''The people can stop the war," Congressman John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan, told thousands of cheering supporters near the Washington Monument on a mild, sunny but breezy afternoon. He urged people to continue to protest ''until this madness is ended.''

Marching on streets that pass within a block or two of the White House, which they were not allowed to approach more closely, the protesters flooded nearly a dozen blocks of city streets in a sea of colorful and often angry antiwar banners and chanted slogans.

Although police gave no official crowd count, a park police supervisor working the scene estimated that the protesters totaled 50,000 people. It was hard to be sure if there were that many, as some came and went, while others milled around in clusters on side streets. Protesters gathered to listen to speeches, then marched around the White House.

If the crowd was smaller than some recent antiwar protests, it might have been because organizers called the ''emergency'' action only a few weeks ago.

Police said the crowd was generally peaceful, although about a half-dozen people were arrested for illegally entering the lobby of the World Bank, a target of past economic protests. Hundreds of police enforced barricades and massed at intersections.

In San Francisco, demonstrators filled Civic Center Plaza, ignoring forecasts for heavy rain and possible unruly acts by splinter protest marchers. Police and organizers declined to provide a crowd estimate.

Some protesters described the mood of the marchers there as less festive than at a February rally. But many demonstrators remained hopeful for a peaceful resolution. ''It's worth it to march to make the numbers count and be counted,'' said Sarah Warnock, 41, a biologist.

Continue reading the main story
A splinter protest at the February rally turned violent. San Francisco officials rerouted today's rally to avoid the downtown shopping area where rioters vandalized stores.

Today the police said they had arrested more than 150 of several hundred people in splinter marches away from the main protest. There was one arrest for throwing a smoke bomb at a police officer, and others were charged with failure to disperse and illegal assembly.

In Los Angeles, the Reverend Jesse Jackson led a noisy and soaking wet procession of about 2,500 people through downtown.

Tama Winograd, a music executive from Hollywood, said the weather was not a hindrance. ''I would be here today, even if there was an earthquake,'' Ms. Winograd said.

About 30,000 protesters converged on the banks of the Willamette River in Portland, Ore. Representative John Lewis, a Democrat from Georgia who marched alongside Martin Luther King, told the crowd, ''People around the world will not be inspired by our missiles and our guns; they will be inspired by our ideas.''

Separately, a group of 41 Nobel laureates in science, medicine and economics who signed a declaration in January opposing war with Iraq said today that eight more laureates, all winners of the Peace Prize, have joined their cause. The eight include Desmond Tutu and the Dalai Lama.

Today's Washington protest was organized by a group called Answer, which stands for Act Now to Stop War and End Racism. The group, formed after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, has drawn criticism from some people inside and out of the antiwar movement because some of its chief organizers are active in radical socialist causes and because it has taken controversial positions on issues not directly related to Iraq. At today's rally, speakers addressed a wide range of issues, including Palestinian statehood, pollution, affirmative action and world hunger.

Continue reading the main story
''We don't police our speakers at all,'' said Larry Holmes, a spokesman for Answer. ''People here raise Palestine, Colombia, everything, but it's all basically about peace.''

Mr. Holmes said that if war with Iraq breaks out, the group plans more severe acts of civil disobedience around the country, including mass sit-ins.

While a New York Times/CBS News Poll last week found that 55 percent of Americans would support an American invasion of Iraq even in defiance of the United Nations, there was near unanimity at today's demonstration in opposition to the war.

Organizers of the protest sought to present a diverse face to emphasize the breadth of dissatisfaction with the administration's Iraq policy.

There were students in tie-dyed shirts playing hacky sack and grandmothers selling antiwar pins. Local residents were joined by out-of-towners. And veteran activists, some who protested the Vietnam War, mingled with novice protesters.

Fred Gregory, a retired Army captain, said he came from Maryland with his wife, Charlotte, to join the protests because he did not believe that Iraq posed the significant threat that the administration says it does.

At 68, Mr. Gregory said, ''this is the first time I've ever protested anything in my life.''

President Bush was the target of criticism in speeches and on antiwar placards, with numerous handmade signs mocking him. Ramsey Clark, the former attorney general who was one of more than 50 speakers to address the rally, told protesters that Mr. Bush should be impeached.

Mr. Conyers, the Michigan congressman, urged Mr. Bush to pay close attention to the rising tide of discontent over Iraq. ''People have stopped wars before -- ordinary people,'' he said later. ''It can happen again here.''
