

Beliefs; In a poll, few say that religion shaped their views on Iraq. The truth may be more complex.
By Peter Steinfels
March 22, 2003

The United States has probably never gone to war with less backing from the nation's religious leaders.

There was a pattern to the statements issued by major religious groups after either President Bush's ultimatum or the beginning of combat: prayers for the safety of American troops and the Iraqi people; laments that efforts to prevent war had failed, with neither Saddam Hussein nor the United States spared from responsibility; admonitions that the war be conducted with every effort to avoid civilian casualties, provide humanitarian aid and lay the groundwork for regional peace.

Spokesmen from evangelical Christian groups like the Southern Baptist Convention and the Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod, as well as the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations, endorsed the administration's belief that war could not be delayed. Most of the other groups stuck to their previous positions and questioned the necessity of unilateral military action at this time.

So much for the leaders. Do their positions affect ordinary Americans in the pews? A poll of 1,032 adults taken last week by the Pew Forum on Religion and American Life and the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press turned up some fascinating though ambiguous findings.

Sixty percent of those responding favored military action against Iraq, although only about 40 percent said they would be in favor if the United States had to fight without major allies.

Contrary to the idea that clergy members assiduously skirt controversial subjects, 57 percent of those responding who regularly attend services reported that their own clergy members had addressed the prospect of a war with Iraq. But of those clergy members who spoke on the war, 60 percent did not take sides, according to the worshipers' recollection.

The position of those who did take sides generally reflected the position of their national leadership. Evangelical Protestant ministers were five times as likely to favor a war as to oppose it. Their mainline Protestant counterparts were far less likely to take a position from the pulpit, but when they did, it was almost always against a war.

Roman Catholic priests were more likely to declare a position in the pulpit than were mainline preachers but less likely to do so than evangelicals; when priests did so, they were nearly all opposed to an attack on Iraq. Black church leaders were by far the most likely to declare their position, and seven times as likely to be against the war as for it.

What was the biggest influence on respondents' thinking about how to deal with Iraq? Forty-one percent of those polled said it was what they had seen or read in the media, while 10 percent said it was religious beliefs. Sixteen percent chose personal experience, and 7 percent named the views of friends and family.

Continue reading the main story
Yet when asked a related question on what degree of influence certain groups had on the way respondents viewed the Iraq question, the pattern became more complicated.

More than half of the respondents said friends and family members had either ''a great deal'' or ''some'' influence.

Political commentators were in second place, with 43 percent of respondents saying they had ''a great deal'' or ''some'' influence. Political leaders came in third (40 percent for Republican leaders, 35 percent for the Democrats), and religious leaders were fourth, at 33 percent. In a distant last were Hollywood celebrities, with 7 percent.

Looking only at the groups having ''a great deal'' of influence, 11 percent of respondents named religious leaders.

That ranked religious leaders below friends and family (14 percent), tied them with Republican leaders but placed them above political commentators and Democratic leaders (both 7 percent) and Hollywood celebrities (2 percent). On the other hand, except for the celebrities, religious leaders were also the group named most often as having had ''no influence at all.''

These findings suggest several interpretations: First, that a major gap exists between outspoken national religious leaders and the more circumspect clergy members in the pulpits. Second, the impact of religion and religious leaders on an issue like Iraq is modest, limited to about 10 percent of the population.

''On balance very few people say their religious beliefs are shaping their views on Iraq,'' the survey's sponsors concluded.

Continue reading the main story
Those interpretations, however, do not take into account many religious traditions' moral teachings about going to war and how they shape people's consciences.

The churches and movements that judge all warfare immoral are a distinct minority. Most religious groups advocate moral principles about using military force, like the notion of a just war, that require complicated, informed judgments about political and military factors.

If believers turn to news reports, political commentators or party leaders for assessments of those factors, is that really an alternative to shaping their views on the basis of religious beliefs, or is it simply a necessary part of putting those beliefs to work?

The same recognition that moral principles cannot operate in a vacuum may affect what clergy members say or do not say from the pulpit. Many who have spoken about the war without declaring a position for or against may simply be aware of the complex political judgments that individuals must make to apply their faith's teachings, and they may also believe that ordination does not necessarily better equip one to make those judgments.

Suppose that observant Americans reported that their thinking about a question like Iraq was influenced simply by religious beliefs and not at all by news reports and political commentators?

Should religious leaders who advocate a religion-based morality on warfare that requires serious weighing of political and military factors be pleased by such findings?

