

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DESERT WARRIORS; Glimpse of Readiness to Fight Iraq At U.S. Copter Base in Afghanistan
By James Brooke
Sept. 10, 2002

If Napoleon fought wars on his soldiers' stomachs, the United States is fighting this desert war on air-conditioned tents.

With 5,000 American soldiers bivouacking here to support helicopter sorties against Taliban and Qaeda stragglers, the wreckage that last year was an old Soviet air base has given way today to rows of triple-ply tents, with chilled air pumped through billowing cloth tubes.

''After 10 hours in the cockpit, our crews can come back and rest,'' said Lt. Col. Paul Bricker, the commanding officer here of the helicopter wing. With many of his Apaches, Chinooks, Hueys and Black Hawks flying daily, he said, ''Now our crews are fresh when they hit that aircraft.''

Looking back a decade to the war with Iraq, he said: ''We had so many helicopter accidents in Desert Storm. How many of those were attributable to lack of rest?''

With the Bush administration talking of a second war with Iraq, tactics and technology used here at the largest American base in Afghanistan may give some insight into how a desert war could be fought.

The air-conditioned tents are just one aspect of what Colonel Bricker called ''a little America,'' a base so self-contained that only a handful of the American troops here have made the 20-mile drive to Kandahar, Afghanistan's second-largest city.

The American strategy of maintaining a limited and carefully defined profile in Afghanistan seems to have worked. Very few Afghans in Kandahar are aware that the airport south of their city is now home to the huge base.

Even after President Hamid Karzai narrowly escaped an assassination attempt on Thursday, the American show of force was limited to a few flyovers by helicopters and the use of one to take the slightly wounded governor of Kandahar Province to the base clinic.

In modern military jargon, everyone at this instant small city has his or her ''lane.''

Over dinner at the air-conditioned mess tent, where the choice on Sunday evening was ham slices or macaroni and ground beef, four Special Forces soldiers could be instantly identified by their dusty beards and deep suntans. Shunning press attention, those soldiers were back from extended operations in faraway villages, largely to gather intelligence.

Continue reading the main story
A group of soldiers weary from daylong patrols through neighboring villages sat at another table.

''Everything here is on a need-to-know basis,'' said Capt. Travis L. McIntosh, the battalion adjutant, explaining the lack of socializing among tables of quiet men and women, their M-4 rifles propped against tables.

Except for two mortar rounds fired at the base two weeks ago, the biggest danger to soldiers here has been the discovery of many mines left over from the days when Soviet troops planted thousands of them to keep Afghan guerrillas away from their base.

Many of the Americans here have probably not met an Afghan. Although officers are sensitive to criticism that air-conditioned toilets and Internet rooms mean that the Army is getting soft, they also contend that for many American soldiers in support jobs here, they do not have to live in third world conditions to keep the helicopters flying.

''This dust here is like baby powder -- it gets into everything,'' Stephen Killough, an Army National Guard aircraft electrician from Salem, Ore., said of his personal war against the fine desert dust that constantly threatens to infiltrate helicopter radios and on-board computers.

Brian H. Wilkins, another Oregonian, who is the pilot of a Black Hawk outfitted for medical evacuations, chimed in: ''You walk through that dust and it splashes. We call it moon dust.''

With many maintenance procedures performed here twice as often as normal, technicians credit air-conditioned tents with allowing them to carry the expanded workload.

''A lot of guys do maintenance at night,'' said Edward D. Rayne, a Black Hawk pilot from Delaware. ''A lot of pilots fly nights. It is hard to sleep if it's 115 degrees outside. If you have to roll up the sides of the tent, you get all the dust and insects in.''

Continue reading the main story
During the United States operation in Iraq a decade ago, air-conditioned tents were largely restricted to field hospitals.

The American soldiers who do work beyond the base perimeter's barbed wire coils experience plenty of dust, heat and interaction with Afghans.

''We go out almost every day,'' Ruben Quinones, a member of an Army Force Protection unit, said this morning as Afghan boys swarmed around his armored Humvee, which was parked outside a village 10 miles north of here. ''The threat around this area is low, but I am glad to help out if they don't have a police force here. Hopefully we can help get the government established here.''

Putting 1,000 miles a week on its Humvees, the unit visits villages, identifying unexploded ordnance for disposal and listening to requests for food aid, barbed wire for livestock and new wells as this parched region enters its eighth year of drought.

Four soldiers and their interpreter sat cross-legged in their desert fatigues, sipping tea, nibbling on crackers and listening to village elders for 90 minutes. A bit miffed at the unexpected arrival of an American reporter, the soldiers at first declined to discuss their work.

But walking back to the Humvees after their meeting, one soldier said, ''This village started out very anti-U.S., anti-coalition.''

''They were not happy that we were here, because they thought we were another group of occupiers, like the Russians,'' he continued, as knots of small boys swarmed around, asking for ballpoint pens for school.

Noting that the unit had worked with aid groups to get projects going in the village, he added, ''But they changed their attitude once they saw we were here to help.''
