

Iraqi Opposition Groups Meet Bush Aides
By Michael R. Gordon
Aug. 10, 2002

Leaders of the Iraqi opposition met with senior Bush administration officials today and vowed to work together to establish a democratic government if Saddam Hussein was removed from power.

The opposition leaders announced afterward that they had secured American support for a conference to discuss the future of Iraq if Mr. Hussein was deposed. The meeting is to take place in Europe in a month or so, they said.

The Iraqi leaders also asked the Bush administration to intervene militarily if Mr. Hussein began to crack down on groups inside Iraq that supported his overthrow. American officials responded that they were not in a position to agree to this appeal today but that they would pass on the request to President Bush, an Iraqi opposition leader said.

''We have presented our vision for overthrowing the dictatorial regime in Iraq and the establishment of a democratic and pluralistic government,'' said Hamid al-Bayati, a representative of the Supreme Council of Islamic Revolution, an Iranian-backed group that was one of six that met with American officials today. ''We sense more seriousness and commitment from the U.S. government to overthrow the Saddam regime and to work with the opposition,'' Mr. Bayati added.

In some ways, the meeting today was heavier on symbolism than on detailed planning. There was no discussion of providing military training to Iraqi insurgent groups, suggesting that the Iraqi opposition does not loom large in the Bush administration's military plans.

Administration officials acknowledge that the six groups whose representatives met at the State Department today do not represent all Iraqis and that it was premature to talk of a government in exile.

President Bush also told The Associated Press today that he had not given himself a timetable for deciding whether to order a military strike against Iraq and might not make that decision this year.

Still, the meeting today was a potentially significant step in the Bush administration's efforts to build a case for military intervention in Iraq. By bringing together the often fractious Iraqi opposition, the Bush administration is trying to show the American public and dubious allies that the Iraqi opponents of Saddam Hussein welcome American military intervention to overthrow the Iraqi leader and that the United States would be justified to act.

The meeting was also intended to show that the opposition is able to work together, crucial to any effort to govern Iraq if Saddam Hussein is deposed. Creating a viable government is widely seen as a potentially greater challenge than a military campaign itself.

Continue reading the main story
The participants in the two-hour meeting at the State Department included representatives of the two main Kurdish parties: Jalal Talabani of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, and Hoshyar Zebari, an aide to Masoud Barzani, the leader of the Kurdish Democratic Party.

Other Iraqi opposition leaders who attended were Ahmad Chalabi of the Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella opposition group; Ayadh Allawi of the Iraqi National Accord, a group that includes former Iraqi military officers and that was involved in a 1996 coup attempt; and Shaif Ali bin Hussein, who represents a group that wants to restore the monarchy.

The Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a Shiite group backed by Iran, also sent a representative from Tehran for the first time in nearly a decade: Abdelaziz al-Hakim, the brother of the leader of the faction, Muhammad Bakr al-Hakim. It was unclear whether his attendance indicated that Iran wants to play a role in removing Mr. Hussein or is simply interested in keeping an eye on the Bush administration's efforts to do so.

Still another purpose of the meeting was to show that the Bush administration has been overcome the divisions in its ranks. The chairmen of the meeting were Marc Grossman, the under secretary of state for political affairs, and Douglas J. Feith, the under secretary of defense for policy. The conspicuous cooperation between senior State and Defense officials follows months of behind-the-scenes infighting in which the two agencies have backed different opposition groups.

''To see the U.S. officials all working together was something new and different and very encouraging for us,'' Mr. Chalabi said in an interview.

To reinforce the impression that the Bush administration is finally united, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell made a point of dropping by the meeting. Vice President Dick Cheney, who is vacationing in Wyoming, also planned to speak to the Iraqi opposition leaders in a videoconference on Saturday.

Even with such a broad array of opposition leaders, some important issues remain. One reason American officials are reluctant to speak of a government in exile is that the Iraqi groups who attended the meeting today do not represent all Iraqis.

Continue reading the main story
The United States is hoping that some Iraqi military units will switch sides and join the fight against Mr. Hussein if Washington opts for military action. These and other Iraqi military groups may be reluctant to act unless they think they will have a role in a new government, a possibility that might seem to be foreclosed if a government in exile is fashioned without their participation now.

The Bush administration also has yet to decide how it would react if Mr. Hussein unleashes a military crackdown on his opponents inside Iraq. Iraqi opposition groups are looking for explicit assurance that Washington will rush to their defense, not simply retaliate militarily at some time in the future.

''For the U.S to say that it would respond at a time and place of its choosing is insufficient for us,'' Mr. Chalabi said. ''Iraqis are taking a big risk. Saddam could do something to threaten a number of areas.''
