

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUNT FOR WEAPONS; Unhindered by Iraqi Officials, Arms Inspectors Visit 3 Sites
By John F. Burns
Nov. 28, 2002

Nearly four years after quitting their work in frustration at Iraqi defiance, United Nations arms inspectors equipped with a new, no-tolerance mandate began a new search on Wednesday for banned weapons programs that could determine whether the United States carries out its threat to go to war to topple President Saddam Hussein.

Two teams of inspectors checked three sites for traces of illegal weaponry, and United Nations officials reported they faced no Iraqi resistance. In effect, the day amounted to a shakedown cruise for the inspectors and for the Iraqis, since the first sites chosen were ones that were checked previously, during inspections that ran from 1991 to 1998, and were thus not high on the checklist of sites thought most likely to yield hidden violations.

A far sterner test for Iraq is expected to come after Dec. 8, when Mr. Hussein's government is required by the United Nations Security Council's new weapons-inspection mandate to declare all of its activities in the field of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons development, as well as any banned work on missiles and ordnance. That declaration is expected to move the new inspections into a period of higher tension, especially if Iraq adheres to its insistence in recent days that it has absolutely no banned programs.

Iraq's claim runs directly counter to the insistence by President Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain that Iraq has continued work on nuclear, chemical and biological warfare programs, as well as missile development, since the United Nations pullout in 1998. The Dec. 8 deadline for Iraq to account for all of its weapons programs, and for any civilian work in related fields, thus sets up the possibility of an early crisis should the weapons inspectors, working on intelligence provided by Washington and London, conduct searches that turn up evidence of Iraq cheating.

Continue reading the main story
Officials of the two international agencies involved -- the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, or Unmovic, charged with tracking down biological, chemical and missile programs, and the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is searching for nuclear programs -- refused to disclose any of the results of the inspections, saying their findings would be reported confidentially to the United Nations bodies involved.

But the inspections, involving a military-run graphite rod factory, a nearby missile testing site and a motor plant with a potential link to nuclear activities, ended with both sides expressing guarded satisfaction at the way in the which the inspections were carried out.

''We hope the Iraqi response today represents the future pattern of cooperation,'' said Jacques Baute, leader of the nuclear inspectors.

Demetrius Perricos, head of the Unmovic team, said, ''We managed to do the things we planned to do.''

Iraqi officials were also keen to emphasize their cooperation. ''We opened doors, and submitted to inspection openly,'' said Ali Jassem Hussein, director of the missile site 25 miles southwest of Baghdad beside the Euphrates River.

Continue reading the main story
Still, the inspectors' first forays outside their headquarters in the United Nations compound on Baghdad's eastern outskirts gave a taste of potential dramas ahead as the teams proceed with plans for daily, unannounced visits that could focus on any of more than 1,000 potential search sites across Iraq, including Mr. Hussein's palaces and even some of the country's mosques.

The new mandate approved unanimously by the Security Council earlier this month grants the inspectors an ''unfettered'' right of immediate access to any site they choose, as well as the right to ''freeze'' all movement in and out of the sites during the inspections.

The inspectors will also have the right to interview any Iraqi scientists without Iraqi officials present to monitor the exchanges, and to take the scientists and their families out of Iraq for the interviews, if the inspectors choose.

The inspectors' new powers were drawn up in the hope of preventing Iraqi officials from renewing the blocking tactics that impeded the inspectors during the 1990's. Although United Nations teams scored major successes, effectively halting an Iraqi nuclear weapons program that was close to producing a bomb, and uncovering a wide range of banned chemical, biological and missile programs, Iraqi officials repeatedly barred access to sites, or used delaying tactics to allow equipment, materials and documents to be removed from sites, sometimes by rear exits, while inspectors waited at the front.

An air of tension settled over Wednesday's inspections from the outset. Just as the inspectors set out from the United Nations headquarters in a former hotel outside Baghdad, air-raid sirens wailed across the capital. Iraqi officials said later that a ''hostile flight'' -- meaning American or British military aircraft enforcing the no-flight zones over northern and southern Iraq -- had flown near Baghdad.

The sirens were followed by a furious car chase through the crowded streets of Baghdad, and out through the suburbs into open country, as the inspectors raced off with Iraqi ''minders'' assigned to them, with reporters in hot pursuit.

The trip ended among the riverside wheatfields of Al Amiriyah, the site of the graphite plant.

The inspectors were admitted to the plant almost immediately, but most then left and drove to another compound housing the Al Rafah missile-testing station, where the Iraqis have built steel structures called test stands for testing missile engines. American intelligence reports have suggested that a new stand at the site could be used for testing missiles with a range of more than the 90 miles permitted by United Nations limits imposed after the gulf war. The Iraqis have said that the structure can be used only for the shorter-range missiles that are permitted.
