

A NATION AT WAR: DESERT WELLS; War Fails to Halt Iraqi Oil Production, but Prompts a Debate About the Future
By Neela Banerjee and Felicity Barringer
March 26, 2003

When the war began, it looked as if Iraq's oil production would come to a halt. But Iraq's massive Kirkuk field in the north is still pumping oil and piping it to the Turkish port of Ceyhan, where storage tanks are filling up.

At a time when worldwide stocks of crude oil are low and prices are volatile, petroleum shipments from Iraq could help calm oil markets, some industry experts say. But exports from Ceyhan have been delayed because of a dispute in the United Nations Security Council that could be the beginning of a protracted fight over the future of Iraq's oil wealth, diplomats and oil industry experts say.

On one side are the United States and Great Britain; on the other are Russia and Syria. The debate focuses on the seven-year-old oil-for-food program, under which the United Nations established Iraq's oil export quota and authorized that the oil revenues be used for relief. The debate stems from suspicions that a resolution drafted by Secretary General Kofi Annan, reauthorizing the program, might be a backdoor way of legitimizing the war and bypassing the existing Iraqi government. It could also lead to the cancellation of billions of dollars in existing contracts, as contracts for food and medicine are given priority over those for other goods on the way to Iraq from places like Russia.

''We don't want a decision by the Council to go even faster and be ahead of the events on the ground,'' Sergey Lavrov, the Russian envoy to the United Nations, said in a recent interview.

Iraq has the second largest oil reserves in the world, after Saudi Arabia, and the Bush administration has made restoration of the oil industry the cornerstone for the revival of the economy in a post-Saddam Hussein Iraq.

Yesterday the administration pushed a demand that revenues from the oil-for-food program be made available to the United States to buy supplies for Iraq.

Andrew S. Natsios, the director of the United States Agency for International Development, said the administration needed the United Nations Security Council to ''make a decision in the next few days'' that would give the United States access to as much as $8 billion held in a United Nations escrow account. Security Council ambassadors are scheduled to consult on the oil-for-food issue today.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell also reiterated at a news briefing yesterday the need for a Security Council resolution covering the program and said the administration was still discussing with other countries the role the United Nations would play in postwar Iraq.

Oil industry experts assumed Iraqi oil production would be widely shut down in light of the suspension within Iraq of the oil-for-food program. The resolution drafted by the secretary general authorizes United Nations officials to directly manage the program. Before last week, Iraqi government agencies had much of the responsibility, under close United Nations supervision.

Continue reading the main story
But oil-for-food was not suspended in the Mediterranean port of Ceyhan, and United Nations inspectors under the program remain there, according to Ian Steele, a spokesman for the program.

The last shipment of oil from Ceyhan occurred last Thursday, Mr. Steele said. Before the war, Iraq pumped 700,000 to 750,000 barrels of oil a day to Ceyhan from Kirkuk. But the Iraqi government has since reduced the flow of oil so that the storage tanks at the port do not fill up, which, in turn, would compel the Iraqis to halt production at Kirkuk. The Ceyhan storage tanks hold between 7 and 10 million barrels of oil, according to various industry estimates.

Oil traders said they had received reports that banks would no longer provide letters of credit to buyers of Iraqi oil, a reluctance they say they do not understand, given Ceyhan's distance from the fighting.

Some traders and diplomats pointed instead to the dispute within the United Nations, saying that the confusion over the continuation of oil-for-food has effectively suspended the program in Ceyhan. The suspicions on both sides reflect the lingering mistrust left after the abortive effort to win Security Council approval for a resolution approving military action.

The anger over oil-for-food boiled over in an experts' meeting Monday, when the United States representative, Andrew Hillman, complained to his Russian counterpart that the Russian arguments were delaying aid shipments to suffering people.

The Russian, Sergey Khazilov, shot back that the suffering was being caused by American bombs, said a diplomat who was present. A spokesman for the United States mission denied that the exchange took place.

For the United States and Britain, the legal objections being made by Russia and Syria mean a frustrating delay in reauthorizing a program which, even before the war, provided for the basic needs of about 60 percent of the Iraqi population of 24 million people.

Continue reading the main story
But for Russia and Syria, both members of the Security Council, legal issues involved are just as crucial. The draft resolution allows for the secretary general's representatives to do their relief work ''in coordination with the relevant authorities,'' a phrase that seems to anticipate the fall of the current government.

Mr. Lavrov said, ''The legal consequences and political consequences'' of a resolution could be to circumvent international law, which requires ''occupying belligerents'' to make reparations for the damages caused in the conflict.

To use funds generated by Iraqi oil for relief after an American-led war, the Russians and Syrians say, is equivalent to making Iraqis pay for their own aid.

But one Security Council diplomat argued that the Russians failed to see the point: ''It does seem that they don't feel any particular urgency about taking measures that would improve the situation.''
