

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Rising War Fears Bring Economic Turmoil to Kurdish-Ruled Zone
By C. J. Chivers
Jan. 18, 2003

Signs of worry over the possibility of war have begun to affect the tenuous economy in northern Iraq, destabilizing the local currency and creating confusion in the market for gasoline and food, commodities that would be essential if the area is besieged.

Northern Iraq is a region outside Saddam Hussein's rule, a place where social services are administered by the United Nations, aid organizations and two Kurdish governments, and where markets are kept stocked in part through networks of smuggling.

All of this has been thrown into mild disarray, as the primary local currency, known as the ''old'' or ''Swiss-print'' dinar, has undergone a remarkable and somewhat mysterious rise against the dollar since New Year's Day.

The rise in the dinar's value undermines local purchasing power because many Kurds, especially those working for the United Nations or the Kurdish governments, are paid in dollars. Many families also receive dollars from relatives abroad.

The economy has been further shaken by threats from Iraq's central government to extend the intermittent closures of the border between north and south, indefinitely closing traffic as soon as next week. This would reduce the flow of consumer goods and food.

These two forces have already combined to cause cash and revenue shortages for the Kurdish governments, and to influence consumer behavior in both predictable and unpredictable ways.

''The pressure now is increasing every day,'' said Faraidoon Abdulkader, who is acting as interim prime minister in the eastern Kurdish zone, while the prime minister is in meetings in Washington.

This week the Kurds took emergency measures to halt the relentless rise in the Swiss-print dinar.

These dinars -- so-called because they are an older print of currency from Switzerland, which are different from the official Iraqi dinar printed in Baghdad -- traded at 11.40 dinars on the dollar in December.

This month the exchange rate fell as low as 6.9, and currency markets in the Kurdish-controlled city of Sulaimaniya were briefly closed late last week to prevent an even wilder shift. Kurdish officials say the surge in the dinar's value has ridden on an almost absurd form of speculation.

Continue reading the main story
Years ago, before Iraq fell into war, each Swiss dinar was worth $3. Kurds have begun hoarding the money in hopes that dinars purchased now for 10 or 12 cents might increase in value 25- or 30-fold if Mr. Hussein is ousted. Kurdish officials describe the hoarding as deeply irrational.

Markets reopened this week, and the dinar has been slightly more stable, trading 7.5 to 9 dinars to the dollar most days. It closed at 8.40 tonight.

Kurdish officials also say the hoarding problem has been compounded by what has to be one of the world's tightest monetary ''policies'': no new notes have been printed for more than 12 years, and not enough exist. On heavy trading days, the dinar sometimes acts more as a commodity than as a currency, rising in value as traders sense that physical supplies are running low.

Kurds further worry that Mr. Hussein's government and the neighboring countries of Syria and and Iran have been snatching up the older dinars to destabilize the Kurdish zone, a rumor that has swept through the markets but so far has not been established as fact.

As an interim emergency measure, both Kurdish governments agreed to release stores of Swiss 1- dinar notes, which have been invalid since the early 1990's, and to pay more government employees in dollars, as a way to underscore the government's confidence in the American currency. They also agreed to begin public relations campaigns against currency hoarders, trying to persuade them that the Swiss-print dinar might become worthless if Iraq is united and a new central bank is formed.

''This is a very abnormal situation,'' Mr. Fuad said.

There have been similar signs of unease in markets for food and fuel, and prices have been cast into confusion by prewar jitters. Real costs of some products have risen, because of the possibility of a shortage, while prices of other products, which are pegged to the dollar, have dropped.

Many of the fluctuations have been brief. Prices for produce from southern Iraq rose by 50 percent this week when the Iraqi government shut the border and supplies fell. When the border reopened after two days, prices returned to normal.

Continue reading the main story
But prices for grains and other food staples, many of which have been purchased and imported with dollars, fell as the dollar's value dropped.

Fuel availability has also been unpredictable. Gasoline purchases are managed by weekly ration cards, and until recently, car owners were allowed to purchase about 10.5 gallons each week, at a government-set price of about 30 cents a gallon at today's currency exchange rate. This week the weekly ration was halved, to 20 liters.

The price of black-market fuel, which costs nearly twice the government rate and is shipped in from the south, doubled again this week, before falling again when the border reopened.

For all the signs of worry, however, the fuel market was not as tight as it could be -- black-market stations, little more than roadside stands selling gasoline from jugs -- have had fuel on hand. Still, black market sellers said that if the border was closed and public fear took hold, prices would surge beyond what most consumers could pay.

This period of confusion, they say, is the beginning of what would become chaos if war breaks out.

''If there is a war, prices will go up and up, and everyone will sell at whatever price they choose,'' said Shamal Bapir, who operates a stand here. ''Then they will run out.''
