

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQI AMERICANS; Refugees Back Effort to End Hussein's Rule Despite Risk to Relatives
By Michael Janofsky
Oct. 11, 2002

They have immigrated to the United States by the thousands over the years, many with still-fresh memories of terror, torture and killing in their homeland. For them, there is no debate over the rightness of America's going to war with Iraq, and they say they need no more reminders from President Bush why Saddam Hussein should be removed from power.

In a sense, Iraqis living in America as refugees and United States citizens are among the staunchest supporters of Mr. Bush's campaign for military action. For many of them, no price is too great to overthrow the Iraqi leader -- even if it costs the lives of ordinary Iraqis, including their own relatives.

''Change of regime is most important,'' said Ali Alseed, 37, who fled Iraq with his wife last year and made his way here, where he works as a car rental agent. ''Casualties will be determined, but we have to pay a price to achieve the goal of regime change. I have no problem with that. It's worth the price.''

Tarik Abed, 44, an auto mechanic who left Iraq in 1997, leaving behind a wife and four children, agreed: ''War has to have casualties. A change in regime has to have casualties. If there are less than 50 percent casualties, then we can celebrate.''

Conceding that many Iraqis could die -- and accepting it as a consequence of American-led success -- is a new measure of the hatred Iraqis here hold for Mr. Hussein, said Jabir Algarawi, the Iraqi-born director of the Arizona Refugee Community Center. Immigrants like Mr. Alseed and Mr. Abed have come to the center since 1993 to find housing, jobs and English language training.

Normally, Mr. Algarawi said, political discourse at the center revolves around a loathing of Mr. Hussein. But now, with the Bush administration trying to build public support for military action, he said talk includes heightened expectations that the president will accomplish what his father failed to do in the 1991 Persian Gulf War -- remove Mr. Hussein and replace his regime with a democracy that would let ordinary people live dignified lives.

''It's a balance,'' Mr. Algarawi said of the new political drift. ''People think about Saddam Hussein. They know we have to get rid of him. They know it will cause casualties. But this is a man who is not in control in a peaceful time. This is a murderer, a criminal, a man who used chemical weapons against his own people. A thousand people are dying every day in Iraq. He is killing them. So it's a mixed feeling, sure -- happiness that it might be the time to remove him, but scared, too, for the civilians who would be a casualty of that.''

Metropolitan Phoenix has become a favorite destination for Iraqis newly arrived in the United States. The 2000 census found 37,714 people across America who identified themselves as Iraqi nationals or Iraqi Americans, the largest numbers living in Michigan, Southern California and New York.

But a hospitable immigrant community and warm, dry weather that reminds many Iraqis of their home villages are drawing a growing number to the Phoenix area, far more than the 822 recorded by census takers. Mr. Algarawi said judging by his center's activity, as many as 4,000 now live in the area.

Continue reading the main story
Many here say they have a surfeit of reasons to despise the Iraqi leader.

Mr. Algarawi said as a 14-year-old schoolboy in Basra, he accidentally bounced a ball against a wall, causing a picture of Mr. Hussein to fall and break. He was arrested, he said, then stripped and tortured for three days by government agents who insisted he knocked the picture down on purpose.

Mr. Alseed said his brother, Alia, joined an opposition group only to be captured by government troops and executed in 1997.

Abdallah Abadeh, 39, a calligrapher who objected to painting propaganda posters for the military, said he was sentenced to 12 years in prison for quitting the army. After serving 18 months, he said he was released on the promise he return to military service, but he fled the country instead.

They all have relatives still living in Iraq, they said, but more than fearing for their relatives' safety, they fear the Bush administration might not deliver what Iraqis want most, an end to Mr. Hussein's regime and destruction of weapons he might use against his enemies.

Mr. Algarawi said he eagerly joined insurgent forces in 1991 when the United States encouraged Iraqi citizens to rise up against their leader. Many did, he said, in all parts of the country. But the United States provided no military support for their actions and expressed no interest in an open-ended occupation or nation building.

As a result, Mr. Algarawi said, ''our uprising was crushed'' by forces loyal to Mr. Hussein, and their anger toward the first Bush administration grew.

''We were very angry'' at the Americans, he said. ''We felt they betrayed us. Thousands died because of nasty politics.''

Continue reading the main story
They say they believe that will not be the case this time. At least, they say they want to believe.

''Hopefully, George Bush will not back off his decision to change the regime,'' Mr. Abed said. ''The Iraqi people would be disappointed. The news now from inside Iraq is that people are defacing pictures of Saddam with graffiti. They are saying, 'It's time for you to go.'

''This time, we don't want just bombing,'' he added. ''We welcome the idea of a regime change. We don't want a repeat of '91.''
