

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INCUMBENTS; Candidates in Tough Races Seem Mindful of Political Repercussions of Stance on Iraq
By Carl Hulse
Oct. 5, 2002

Representative Constance A. Morella, Republican of Maryland, is in a very close race for re-election. She is not rushing to embrace President Bush on his call to act against Iraq.

David Phelps, a Democrat from Southern Illinois who is in a tough fight of his own, is joining hands with the president. He went to the White House to extend his support personally to Mr. Bush even before Congressional leaders worked out the language for a resolution on an attack on Iraq.

While these lawmakers and most others in Congress insist that there is no political calculation in the life-and-death subject of Iraq, the way candidates in the nation's most competitive races are approaching the issue suggests they are mindful of potential political repercussions. And they are doing their best to limit any fallout.

Democrats in states and districts with a conservative tilt are typically giving whole-hearted backing to Mr. Bush in his call for authority to take on Saddam Hussein. Some Republican moderates seeking to represent areas with a healthy presence of Democrats are holding back, expressing caution about a unilateral strike against Iraq.

''I have reservations about the resolution,'' said Mrs. Morella, who is running in a district that has been redrawn to include many more Democrats than she has represented in the past. ''I don't see any post-Hussein strategy.''

Strategists of both parties say that in the end it might be a wash, with candidates in the closest fights sharing identical opinions on Iraq, forcing voters to base their choices on something else entirely.

''It is not clear at all that the war is going to be a voting issue in Congressional races,'' said James M. Jordan, executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.

But that does not mean national security will not be inserted into campaigns, as Republicans are trying to do in the South Dakota Senate race, where both candidates are backing the war resolution supported by President Bush. A new advertisement there by the campaign of Representative John Thune, a Republican, flashes a picture of Iraq's leader while accusing Senator Tim Johnson, the Democratic incumbent, of opposing missile defense systems.

The clearest distinction might be in Minnesota's Senate race, where the Democratic incumbent, Paul Wellstone, has come out against the Bush-backed war resolution and is being criticized by his Republican opponent, Norm Coleman.

Continue reading the main story
''I think that in some races it very well could become an issue,'' said the Senate minority leader, Trent Lott, Republican of Mississippi. ''When it comes to defense, national security, foreign policy, the American people, you know, support and agree with the Republicans and with President Bush by wide margins.''

In some of the other closely watched Senate races, Democratic incumbents like Jean Carnahan of Missouri and Mary L. Landrieu of Louisiana have already said they would support the president. But in Iowa, where polls have found that public support for a possible war lags behind that in the rest of the nation, neither Senate candidate has taken a definitive stand.

Senator Tom Harkin, the Democratic incumbent, said this week that he was open to the revised resolution put forward by the White House but could not guarantee his support. Aides to his Republican opponent, Representative Greg Ganske, said he would make public his view in a few days.

Another Iowa Republican in a tough race, Representative Jim Leach, has already come out against the resolution and was one of two Republicans to vote against it in the International Relations Committee on Thursday. But he said the war vote must be made free of politics.

''This is a judgment call that individual members make unrelated to their political party,'' Mr. Leach said after the vote. ''War and peace is the soberest issue and I believe the least partisan.''

Elsewhere around the country, Democrats in tough contests in conservative Southern districts like Ronnie Shows in Mississippi and Roger Kahn, a candidate for an open seat in Georgia, both quickly fell in behind the president.

''Elections are about differences, and this is not coming up as a difference in each of the districts we are looking at,'' said Jenny Backus, a spokeswoman for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. ''By and large, each of our candidates shares their opinion with the Republican opponent.''

Continue reading the main story
Carl Forti, the spokesman for the Republican House campaign arm, agreed that if the war resolution is adopted, ''with most Democrats from vulnerable districts that we are targeting voting with the president, then it probably doesn't become an issue.''

But he, like Mr. Lott, said he believed a political atmosphere heavy with talk of war and national security still favored Republicans. Party officials plan to emphasize that theme, using the legislative deadlock over the new Homeland Security Department as the metaphor for security issues while trying to remind voters of a trip to Baghdad taken by Democratic representatives who questioned Mr. Bush's motives.

''That is not a good image, and it brings back bad memories from the past,'' Mr. Lott said.

But Mrs. Morella's race illustrates how the war issue can cut both ways. As she tries to hold on to her seat against a serious Democratic challenger, State Senator Chris Van Hollen, she has difficult choices from a political standpoint. She can side with the president and hold on to her Republican base, or she can oppose the resolution in an effort to reach Democrats uneasy with war but who might not vote for her regardless.

''All of my votes are tough,'' she said. ''I am not here to do the easy thing.''
