

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WAR PREPARATIONS; U.S. Military Set to Provide Aid to Iraqi People in the Event of War, Commander Says
By Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker
Feb. 11, 2003

As the United States edges closer to attacking Iraq, the commander of American forces in the Persian Gulf said today that the military would take much of the responsibility for providing food and medicine to the Iraqi people from the first day of any war.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the chief of the United States Central Command, also said that despite public disputes with some of America's traditional allies, especially Germany and France, who are working to slow any march to war, ''we will have all of the support we need'' from military partners in the region and around the world should President Bush order the nation to war.

General Franks is scheduled to be in Washington on Wednesday to brief Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and possibly Mr. Bush on the progress of war planning. He said he would return to the Persian Gulf region by the end of the month.

A senior military official said it was likely that General Franks would then remain at his command's forward headquarters in Qatar until the Iraq crisis ended. General Franks declined to say whether he had formally decided to move to the region, along with his senior staff, an action that would be widely interpreted as one of the final preparations for war.

Even as more than 100,000 American forces have massed in the gulf and commanders are fine-tuning their battle plans, General Franks, in a wide-ranging, hourlong interview conducted at his headquarters here, said the military was coordinating with international relief organizations and regional governments to prevent a disaster for civilians in the immediate aftermath of any attack.

A senior military official said that the Central Command was now sending ''millions of meals'' to the region, a program many times larger than the airdrop and delivery of 2.4 million prepackaged rations the Pentagon carried out in Afghanistan.

''Humanitarian supplies are being positioned in order to address this sort of an issue,'' General Franks said, noting that one of the factors driving the shape and size of his forces was the need to deal with aid to the Iraqi people. In some cases, the military will provide leadership and some suggestions, and in other cases the military will offer its help coordinating the work of other organizations. General Franks made clear that his command had not convened any type of general session involving the major aid groups.

While much of the discussion surrounding Iraq in recent weeks has focused on the buildup of forces in the Persian Gulf, General Franks was clearly telling the Iraqi people -- and a world that remains skeptical of the Bush administration's intentions -- that the American military wants to be viewed as the liberator and protector of an oppressed Iraq, not an enemy occupying force.

But relief organizations immediately disputed the degree of coordination that has taken place so far, saying that the military might well have prepared detailed plans for aid but so far had not shared them with the groups that would help provide food, clothing and medicines.

Continue reading the main story
''Until this point, the administration has been quite reluctant to discuss the details,'' said Kenneth Bacon, president of Refugees International, an aid group in Washington. ''The military's response has been, we'll call you when we're ready.''

Sandra Mitchell, vice president of the International Rescue Committee, said today that her organization had not been briefed on the military's plan for relief assistance to Iraq. ''We have been trying for five or six months now to get an information from the U.S. military about what type of humanitarian activities they are planning to do in Iraq,'' she said. ''We are not coordinating any planning with the military.''

She said nongovernment relief organizations had very little capacity for work in Iraq, because they are barred from operating there by international sanctions. Up to 60 percent of Iraq's 23 million to 25 million people already rely on the United Nations oil-for-food program for sustenance, Ms. Mitchell said.

A senior military official said tonight that major details of the plan had been withheld from the aid groups until the military could notify Congress and because the details were so closely tied to the operational planning for carrying out the war.

General Franks expressed complete optimism that he would have enough military power surrounding Iraq to assure victory should President Bush order the nation to war.

''There is considerable interest in the international community in the building of a coalition in the event that military operations are necessary,'' General Franks said. ''I do not know what size it will be. I do know that if an operation is necessary, and you've heard this before, we will have all the support we need in order to accomplish the mission.''

He predicted international support for American action regardless of an additional security resolution or formal NATO endorsement.

Continue reading the main story
But he deflected repeated questions about the timing and tactics of a war with Iraq, except to say that any conflict would not look like the gulf war in 1991. He also declined to discuss the size and duration of any allied force that would remain in Iraq after a conflict.

General Franks dismissed fears voiced by critics of war with Iraq that a conflict would divert military resources and focus away from the hunt for Al Qaeda.

The general, who is the subject of a Pentagon inspector general inquiry into possible abuse of his office, also said the scrutiny was in no way affecting his ability to carry out his mission.
