

U.N. and Congress Rebuff Iraq's Inspection Invitation
By Barbara Crossette and Alison Mitchell
Aug. 6, 2002

The United Nations Security Council and Secretary General Kofi Annan agreed yesterday that weapons inspectors would not go to Iraq to reopen talks after a break of almost four years unless Saddam Hussein's government agreed to abide by the organization's rules on how inspections must be conducted.

The emergence of a largely solid front against talking to Iraq unless the agenda is set at the United Nations was one of two setbacks yesterday for Iraq, which is under threat of military attack by the United States. In Washington, leading members of Congress refused an Iraqi invitation to come to the country and inspect suspected arms sites for themselves. Democrats and Republicans were equally dismissive. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld called the invitation ''a joke.''

The invitation to Congress came in a letter from Dr. Sadoun Hammadi, the speaker of the rubber-stamp National Assembly, who was apparently trying to pit legislators against the Bush administration.

''One of the biggest problems that has existed since 1990 between our people and country, on the one hand and the successive U.S. administrations on the other,'' Dr. Hammadi wrote, interjecting a litany of what he described as American crimes against Iraq, ''has been the absence of all channels of dialogue between our two countries, the channels that might have helped develop a language of understanding between our respective representatives.'' The letter said members of Congress could bring arms experts and should plan to stay three weeks.

At the end of the Persian Gulf war, Iraq was required to end programs in biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and to stop developing missiles that could deliver them. Comprehensive sanctions imposed by the Security Council when Iraq invaded Kuwait were not to be lifted until Iraq fully complied with disarmament tasks, as verified by the United Nations inspectors. But inspection teams complained that Iraq did not cooperate, and the last team was withdrawn in 1998, before American bombing.

On Thursday, in a separate letter to the secretary general, Iraq invited the head of the United Nations inspection commission, Hans Blix, to resume discussions. Diplomats and United Nations officials were skeptical, seeing the invitation as an Iraqi diplomatic ploy and an effort to circumvent a Security Council resolution that clearly lays out the kind of inspections required.

Mr. Annan said his reply to the Iraqis would not be an outright rejection, but more of a challenge.

''All the members of the Council agree that we should do everything to get the inspectors back,'' he said, describing any disagreements that arose as ''shades of emphasis.'' A diplomat present at the lunch said the Russians, Syrians and Chinese were the most enthusiastic proponents of a positive reply to Iraq. The United States was the most opposed.

Dr. Blix, a former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, has said repeatedly that the resolution creating his inspection team demands that he be allowed to send inspectors into the country for up to 60 days to investigate what may have been happening since 1998. After that, the inspectors would draw up a list of what Iraq needs to do to have the sanctions imposed in 1990 suspended and ultimately lifted.

In the letter to the United Nations, the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, talked about a comprehensive review in Baghdad talks that would lead to the lifting of the sanctions.

Continue reading the main story
At the White House yesterday, President Bush convened a session of the National Security Council to discuss political and military thinking about an operation to topple Mr. Hussein.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, head of the United States Central Command, was scheduled to brief the session on the latest ''concept of operations'' for a possible attack against Iraq, Pentagon and military officials said.

The officials said the briefing was not to present a specific war plan to be approved or rejected. Instead, the officials said, General Franks was to update the president and his security team about ''recent refinements'' to the ''broad outlines of plans'' for possible military action.

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who has expressed support for removing Mr. Hussein, received another kind of letter yesterday, one from a critic in his own Labor Party, warning that Parliament should be consulted before Britain joined any American campaign against Iraq.

The open letter, from Tam Dalyell, said Mr. Blair had a moral obligation to recall Parliament from summer break to debate the issue. The Royal Navy has decided to send its flagship aircraft carrier, Ark Royal, to the Mediterranean, prompting speculation that military action is growing imminent.

In Washington yesterday, leaders from both parties, in rejecting Iraq's invitation to visit weapons sites, said they would not serve as an excuse for Baghdad to avoid allowing United Nations inspectors to return. Mr. Rumsfeld was even more dismissive.

''I can't think of anything funnier than a handful of congressmen wandering around,'' he said during a meeting with journalists. ''You see the size of the country? They'd have to be there for the next 50 years!

Continue reading the main story
''It's a joke.'' --------------------

F.B.I. Called on Leak

(By The New York Times), WASHINGTON, Aug. 5 -- Secretary Rumsfeld has asked the F.B.I. to investigate the disclosure last month of classified planning options for an invasion of Iraq, saying whoever leaked the information should be imprisoned.

For several weeks, Mr. Rumsfeld has complained about a July 5 article in The New York Times that indicated that American military planners were considering an invasion of Iraq from three directions -- the north, the south and the west. The article was based on classified Pentagon planning documents.
