

A NATION AT WAR: WITH THE TROOPS | NAVY SPECIAL WARFARE GROUP; Cat and Mouse on Iraq's Crucial Waterways
By James Dao
March 24, 2003

They thought the Iraqi tug might be filled with mines and possibly snipers. A suicide boat, the Navy Special Operations boat crew called it.

A boarding party of Polish commandos in black masks strapped on Kevlar vests and loaded their M-4 carbines. An American seaman on the back of a high-speed Navy boat used his infrared scope to aim a .50-caliber machine gun at the darkened tug. The crew braced for a firefight.

But the tug turned out to be abandoned, a false alarm in the cat-and-mouse game for control of the northern Persian Gulf, Iraq's maritime lifeline to the outside world.

The boarding party was part of an expanded campaign by Navy Seals and Special Boat Units to gain access to the lower Tigris River, a crucial first step for shipping military equipment and relief aid into southern Iraq. Eventually, American military commanders hope to ship supplies up the Tigris all the way to Baghdad.

This morning, based on a 12-hour patrol with a four-boat unit, it appeared that American and coalition naval forces had gained almost complete control of the waterways bordering Iraq and Kuwait near the city of Umm Qasr, a strategic port where American and British marines are battling Iraqi troops.

By daylight, an American transport helicopter could be seen dragging a minesweeping sled across a stretch of Khor Abdullah, a waterway that links the Tigris to the Persian Gulf. Larger American and coalition ships have begun removing mines from the Persian Gulf itself.

Navy officers said that within three days, large cargo ships could begin ferrying military supplies, food, water and medicine to inland cities.

''Clearing these waterways is essential to transporting humanitarian aid,'' said Jason, a barrel-chested member of the Seals who commanded today's operation. Like all the Special Operations troops interviewed for this story, he refused to use his full name.

The boat patrols are part of a broader campaign by Navy Special Warfare units to secure oil installations and waterways in southern Iraq.


In simultaneous raids that began on Thursday night and continued into Friday, several platoons of Seals, aided by Special Boat Units, Air Force Special Operations pilots and Polish commandos seized two oil-pumping stations and a petroleum metering station near Fao in southeastern Iraq. Seal teams also took control of two oil terminals 25 miles off shore at the end of Iraq's major pipeline.

No Americans were wounded or killed in the operations, American commanders said. More than 40 Iraqi soldiers and seamen were taken prisoner at all the installations, and at least 2 Iraqis were killed during a firefight at the tank farm, the officials said. They declined to provide precise numbers of the dead or captured.

With those lightening raids, American military officers said they had prevented the Iraqi government from dumping 1.8 million barrels of oil into the Persian Gulf.

''We needed to seize all five points simultaneously,'' said Capt. Robert S. Harward, who commands the Naval Special Warfare Task Group that coordinated the raids. ''It went like clockwork.''

Having secured and turned those installations over to American and British marines, the Navy Special Warfare units appear to be turning northward to assist in securing the region around Fao -- where British Royal Marines continued to fight stubborn pockets of Iraqi resistance today -- and to opening up Iraq's southern waterways to American ships.

To establish control over the lower Tigris River delta, the Navy has begun round-the-clock boat patrols along parts of Khor Abdullah, searching for escaping Iraqi officials, mine-laying ships and sniper boats.

Late last week, a patrol captured an Iraqi tug that contained 87 mines. Another patrol today captured 12 Iraqi soldiers in a dhow, a small merchant vessel, and destroyed a second dhow that was filled with explosives.

Normally, the waterways in this area are as packed as a California freeway, as one member of the Seals put it, with commercial vessels carrying oil, grain, fish and other goods. But today, the area was eerily devoid of ships.

Navy officials attributed the quietness to the threat of American bombing, combined with a recent psychological campaign by Army Special Operations units that used leaflets and Internet messages to warn ships captains from coming into the region.

''As far as the war plan goes, this is perfect,'' said Chris, a lieutenant junior grade who commands a gunboat. ''It makes it easier to demine. It means we don't have to stop lots of boats. It means we'll clear the way to Baghdad faster.''

Today's Navy patrol involved four boats: two Mark 5's -- jet-powered gunboats that carried Seals, Polish commandos and explosives experts -- and two smaller high-speed boats known as RIB's, for rigid-hull inflatable boats.

Operating in the dark, using infrared radars and night-vision goggles, the boat captains searched for suspicious-looking tugs and dhows, circling them like police officers looking for fugitives in abandoned cars.

This part of the Persian Gulf is a graveyard for derelict ships, and the hulking prows of half-sunken tankers and cargo ships stand upright like tombstones in the shallow waters.

The suspicious tug was moored to one of those carcasses. After shining infrared beams and spotlights on it, Chris, the captain, radioed a warning:

''If you do not comply, we will be forced to sink your vessel,'' he said. There was no answer.

The boarding party searched the tug thoroughly and found nothing. The crew breathed a sigh of relief.

''In our business, boring is good,'' Chris said, then pulled his gunboat around to search for more suicide boats.
