

U.S. Quietly Chides German For His Dissension on Iraq
By Steven Erlanger
Aug. 17, 2002

The United States has expressed official displeasure with statements by Chancellor Gerhard Schröder that ruled out German participation in an American-led war on Iraq, which he described as ''an adventure,'' officials said today.

The American ambassador, Daniel R. Coats, went to the chancellor's office this week to deliver the message that Washington was unhappy about Mr. Schröder's remarks, the officials said.

It was ''a highly unusual event between such close allies,'' one official said.

It was also a sharp contrast to the gratitude the United States expressed to Mr. Schröder for his immediate declaration, after Sept. 11, of ''unlimited solidarity'' with the United States. President Bush had a successful visit to Berlin in May, appearing to calm German fears about any move against Iraq before the German elections on Sept. 22.

In many ways, Mr. Schröder's comments reflect general European doubts about the urgency and wisdom of an attack on Iraq, doubts also shared by some American officials. While Europeans recognize that the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, is probably pursuing weapons of mass destruction, they say there is no intelligence, either American or European, showing that he currently has nuclear weapons or that he has helped Al Qaeda in any way.

The Bush administration understands that Mr. Schröder is in the middle of a hard-fought election campaign and that he is trying to shore up his support among left-wing voters, the officials said. But Washington ''is not happy at the accusation that it is not consulting with its allies'' or that Mr. Bush is ''a trigger-happy Texan,'' in the words of one senior American official.

Mr. Coats did not speak directly to Mr. Schröder, a choice made by the United States in order to keep its criticism more general and low-key, the officials said.

''We agree that Saddam Hussein is a dangerous man and we would like to see him gone,'' a senior French official said. ''But we disagree on how urgent a threat he represents, and we think that a war in Iraq could set the Middle East on fire and destroy the coalition against terrorism.''

But Mr. Schröder's comments, in the heat of politics, were sharper and more openly critical of the Bush administration, and appeared designed to appeal to the majority of voters who oppose German participation in any war against Iraq, even with a United Nations mandate.

Opening his election campaign earlier this month, Mr. Schröder said Germany would ''not make itself available for an adventure'' in Iraq, would not participate in or help to pay for any such war, and would pursue its own interests by taking ''the German way,'' or path. He said an attack on Iraq ''would be less easily understood as an act of defense and could destroy the international alliance against terror.''

Continue reading the main story
He cautioned the Bush administration, ''I can only warn against discussing a war in Iraq now without thinking of the political consequences and without having a political concept for the entire Middle East.

''We are ready for solidarity, but this land will not be prepared for adventures, as long as I'm in control,'' he said. ''I believe we should keep up the pressure on Saddam Hussein, yes. But I'm not for playing around with war or military action.''

While in some ways Mr. Schröder is summarizing European worries about both Mr. Bush and Iraq, in other aspects, German officials acknowledge, Mr. Schröder went too far. No one here, after World War II, wants any special ''German way'' in foreign policy separate from NATO and the European Union. ''Our whole education,'' one German official said, ''is to never go it alone again.''

Mr. Schröder's remarks also brought harsh criticism from the conservative opposition spokesman for foreign affairs, Wolfgang Schäuble. In an interview, he said that Mr. Schröder was ''strengthening Saddam Hussein'' by undermining the unanimity of international pressure on Iraq to open up to United Nations weapons inspectors.

''It's not about war now but about deterrence,'' Mr. Schäuble said. ''If Saddam is convinced there is no way out, he'll be careful. But if he sees great differences between Washington and Berlin, he'll be encouraged.''

Germany's interest is in ''a strong Atlantic relationship, that's the lesson of history,'' he added. ''If you are a leader, you cannot tell Germans that we must fear American decisions. We must maintain European-American solidarity at the end of the day -- and there is no 'German way.' ''

But his own candidate for chancellor, Edmund Stoiber, has been extremely cautious on the issue, calling a war against Iraq ''a hypothetical question'' and saying he hopes it can be avoided. Mr. Schäuble said, though, that he had cleared his remarks on Iraq with Mr. Stoiber.

Continue reading the main story
In response to American and German criticism, the officials said, Mr. Schröder in recent days has been more careful to emphasize that Germany remains a close ally with the United States in Europe and in the campaign against terrorism, and that Germany will not go it alone.

He has repeated that Mr. Hussein must allow unconditional access by United Nations weapons inspectors. He also has said that he is simply making an important contribution to the necessary political debate about Iraq. He told the German weekly Die Zeit that ''a political debate creates political facts.''

When asked about his earlier pledge of ''unconditional solidarity'' with the United States, Mr. Schröder said, ''There is unconditional solidarity with the friend who is attacked.'' In fact, German troops participate in the peacekeeping in Afghanistan.

Iraq, he implied, was a different question entirely.
