

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE KURDS; Turks, Fearing Flow of Refugees Plan Move Into Iraq if War Comes
By Dexter Filkins
Nov. 23, 2002

Turkish officials are preparing to send troops up to 60 miles into northern Iraq on what they say is a mission to prevent an influx of refugees in the event that a war there sets off a mass movement toward Turkey's borders.

The plan, which is being circulated among top government officials, is giving rise to fears that it could be used as a cover for the Turkish military to snuff out any attempt by Iraqi Kurds to set up their own state if President Saddam Hussein falls from power.

Turkey has been battling its own Kurdish insurgency for years, and Turkish leaders are concerned that a war in Iraq could lead to an independent Kurdish state on their own borders.

Turkish officials say they are fearful that an Iraqi attack on the Kurds in Iraq, possibly with biological or chemical weapons, could cause a panic similar to the one that followed the Persian Gulf war in 1991, when more than a million Kurds poured into Turkey and Iran in flight from the attacking Iraqi Army.

''In case of a massive influx, it would be necessary to take measures to keep them away from our border,'' said Gokhan Aydiner, regional governor in southeastern Iraq. ''We have our own experience from 1991 in mind. We naturally do not want it to be repeated.''

The Turkish plan is a measure of the anxiety that is sweeping the region as the threat of an American-led war with Iraq looms. While many leaders in the area say they would be happy to see Mr. Hussein ousted, they fear a war's unintended effects.

In Turkey, for instance, officials have indicated that they would support an American-led attack, but they are determined to avoid a repeat of 1991. That crisis began weeks after the gulf war had ended, when Iraq's Kurds, emboldened by Mr. Hussein's defeat, rose up against him.

Iraqi forces loyal to Mr. Hussein responded with ferocity, and thousands of Kurds headed for the borders. American troops and international aid agencies rushed in to help deal with the crisis, but at one point more than 1,000 people a day were dying on the borders from exposure and disease.

Turkish officials insist that the influx of refugees helped fuel the long-running Kurdish insurgency inside Turkey.


This is a delicate time for Turkey, which is seeking membership in the European Union. One factor inhibiting Turkey's admission has been its often brutal treatment, and sometimes torture, of suspected members of Kurdish guerrilla groups.

The plan for sealing the borders, dated Oct. 22 and signed by Bulent Ecevit, who was then prime minister, envisions the establishment of 18 camps -- 12 of them in Iraq -- designed to hold about 275,000 refugees. The camps in Iraq would be filled first, and foreigners trying to enter Turkey before the first 12 camps were filled would be turned back. The camps in Turkey would be opened only after the ones in Iraq were filled.

The plan calls on the army to ensure ''the maintenance of security in the region,'' and it makes it clear that the government does want any refugees to stay for long.

''The main principle will be to send foreigners settled in the camps either back to their region of origin or to third countries,'' the document says.

Human rights workers in Turkey have sharply criticized the Turkish preparations to go into Iraq, with some saying that the real goal would be to forestall any attempt by Iraq's Kurds to set up their own government there. The rights groups fear the Turkish Army would make it impossible for them to work in northern Iraq, and thus would effectively deny the Kurdish people the very benefits the Turkish government says it wants to deliver.

''The Turkish Army would do its best to eliminate the possibility of a Kurdish entity in northern Iraq, through military means,'' said Selahattin Demitas, of the Turkish Human Rights Association. ''The only law that will be applied in that area would be the law of war.''

Others say the Turkish plan, if carried out, would violate longstanding norms of international law governing the treatment of refugees. Generally speaking, countries are obliged to grant entrance to people fleeing persecution from other countries. Officials at the United Nations, which would ordinarily play a large role in any relief effort, say the Turkish government has refused so far to divulge the plan's details.

Continue reading the main story
''We couldn't get as much cooperation as we expected,'' said Metin Corabatir, spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Ankara. ''We have not seen the report.''

Turkish leaders already regard their country as an embattled front line against illegal immigrants from Asia. In the first 10 months of this year, more than 13,000 people were detained trying to cross into Turkey from Iraq. Most were Iraqi, but the police arrested Bangladeshis and Indians as well.

Another refugee crisis would complicate Turkey's tangled relationship with the Kurds. Several parts of the country near the Iraqi border are under emergency rule. Although the government offers political support for Kurdish groups battling Mr. Hussein in Iraq, hundreds of Turkish troops are operating in northern Iraq to root out remnants of Kurdish guerrillas there.

A Turkish move into northern Iraq would be an unusual response to a refugee crisis, but not an unprecedented one. During the American-led campaign in Afghanistan last year, Iranian officials set up a refugee camp in western Afghanistan to forestall an influx of Afghans into their country.
