

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Thousands of Kurds Flee Front-Line Cities Fearing Attack by Hussein
By C. J. Chivers With David Rohde
March 18, 2003

Kurdish civilians began fleeing cities or safeguarding homes today along the front lines with the Iraqi Army in northern Iraq, saying that as war draws near they feared a conventional or chemical attack from Saddam Hussein.

Crowded into taxis and buses, riding in trailers behind tractors, or simply piled into cars, they formed lines on the highways, seeking what they hoped would be safety in villages out of range of Iraqi artillery.

The exodus was apparent in the cities of Kifri, Kalar, and Dohuk, as well as in this city of 60,000 people, which sits just under a ridge occupied by Iraqi soldiers.

''We are afraid of chemical weapons, we are afraid of the tanks, we are afraid of the artillery,'' said Faizulla Karim Rahman, 66, a retired policeman who was moving 10 family members from Chamchamal. ''We are going to a village away from here.''

In Erbil, the largest city in northern Iraq, thousands fled during the day. The withdrawal was marked by anxiety but not panic. Pickup trucks and station wagons bursting with children, clothing and food dotted the streets. Mile-long lines for gasoline snaked down avenues.

By late afternoon, nervous residents were also making a run on plastic sheeting for use against a chemical attack. Some said they would remain behind.

''We will use the plastic and stay in our home,'' said Infida Hussein, a schoolteacher who was searching for fast-selling plastic. ''Fear is everywhere.''

The last-minute preparations in the anticipated battle area came as diplomacy stalled at the United Nations and President Bush was expected to deliver an ultimatum to Mr. Hussein in a televised speech.

Already, tensions between Kurdish and Turkish officials have increased markedly over whose forces will take control of the oil-rich cities of Kirkuk and Mosul once the Iraqis are driven out. Both the Kurds and the Turks have massed soldiers and weaponry along the border between Iraq and Turkey.

Continue reading the main story
News media here have reported fully on the stalled diplomacy and the mounting regional tensions, also palpable on the Iraqi-Kurdish front.

In the last two weeks, the Iraqi Army has prepared new bunkers and trench lines on the ridge above this city.

Kurdish civilians have also watched a swelling number of Kurds fleeing from areas of Iraq controlled by Mr. Hussein, many arriving with tales of an Iraqi security crackdown in Kirkuk. The crackdown, they said, was aimed at rounding up suspected Kurdish underground members who are suspected of plotting uprisings inside Iraq.

As many as 675 Kurds fleeing Kirkuk have arrived in this city in recent days, according to the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, which controls the eastern zone here. Northern Iraq, now administered by Kurds and largely under the protection of American and British aircraft, de facto seceded from Mr. Hussein's Iraq in 1991.

A Kurdish intelligence official said the crackdown began last week after Iraqi security agents caught three Kurds with satellite telephone phones inside Kirkuk.

The telephones had been provided by the United States for intelligence collection and coordination, and had recently been smuggled into Iraq, the intelligence official said. He said many more phones, and agents, had been sent into the Iraqi zone.

Many fleeing Kurds also said they have heard that Iraq has rigged explosives to wells in the oil fields outside of Kirkuk, and that Mr. Hussein plans to torch the fields in Iraq just as his soldiers did in Kuwait 12 years ago. These claims have not been verified by the opposition, security officials said.

Continue reading the main story
Kurdish officials and international aid organizations have said for months that a war in Iraq might set in motion great waves of people, and today offered the first glimpse.

Kurds have been making arrangements since at least late January, when they first sensed the United Nations weapons inspections would be drawing to a close. Many have rented houses in villages distant from the Iraqi soldiers, or have cached food, clothes and sleeping gear at relatives' houses away from the front.

But most had also remained in place, keeping their children in schools and maintaining their jobs, while waiting for the moment when it seemed war was nigh. The moment came today, and residents in Erbil, a city of more than a million people, said they feared one thing -- chemical attack.

Families departing the city said they were fleeing north to remote mountain villages. Those buying plastic sheeting said they were trying to make their homes resistant to infiltration by chemical weapons.

''We will put plastic over our heads,'' said Kakamand Fatah, a 37-year-old porter in a market in Erbil. ''We will make a tent.''

His wife, Fayruz, was one of several people who asked why the United States had not provided gas masks to the Kurds. Local officials say only several dozen antiquated gas masks are available for the 3.8 million people who live in northern Iraq.

''Protect us by giving us gas masks,'' said the mother of seven children ranging from 2 to 12 years old. ''Where can I go with my little kids?''

Continue reading the main story
For all of the fear, some expressed satisfaction that a war against Mr. Hussein seemed soon to begin.

Karim Agha, the tribal chief in Chamchamal, sat in his home and estimated that 6,000 or 7,000 of his neighbors had left today. He was pleased.

''Old people, children, wives, those who are sick -- it is better for them to be out of here, and it is normal during a war,'' he said. ''But I am happy now. We hate Saddam, and we want him removed.''
