

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE SUSPECTS; U.S. Businessman Linked To Iraqi Arms Purchases
By Philip Shenon
Jan. 23, 2003

An Iraqi-American businessman recently arrested in Europe was once a key middleman for Saddam Hussein in illegal weapons purchases and last year was trying to organize a last-minute arms-buying spree for Iraq in response to the growing threat of an American invasion, according to American and European law-enforcement officials.

The businessman, Sahib Abd Amir Haddad, 59, who ran a large international trading company in Nashville in the 1980's and 1990's, had previously been identified as a major supplier of Iraq's chemical weapons program before the 1991 Persian Gulf war. He was arrested last November in Bulgaria and is awaiting extradition to Germany, where he has been charged with conspiring in the late 1990's with two German men to purchase equipment for Iraq for the manufacture of a giant cannon.

German prosecutors have said the canon -- a ''supergun'' -- could have been used to lob chemical, biological or nuclear weapons up to 35 miles. ''Haddad is the most important person in connection with this,'' said Stephan Morweiser, a prosecutor in Mannheim, Germany, who is overseeing the trial of the German men. ''He got the directions from Iraq, the list of goods that Iraq wanted.''

American and European officials said that Mr. Haddad had attempted to buy other weapons and equipment for Iraq in the last two years, including rockets, machine guns and parts for Iraq's aging fleet of Russian-made MIG's.

''We do know that he's been in and out of Baghdad plenty,'' an American official said.

''And we're convinced that Iraq's wish list grew and grew late last year,'' as the Bush administration stepped up its threats to invade Iraq, the official said.

Mr. Haddad left the United States in the mid-1990's after the collapse of his Nashville businesses and has lived most recently in the Middle East. He was remembered in Tennessee as a flamboyant businessmen whose ventures included the trading company, a Bavarian restaurant and large real estate holdings. He once owned the former Nashville home of the country music star Tex Ritter.

The Iraqi government acknowledged that his ties to its weapons industry dated back to at least to the 1980's, when his trading company supplied Iraq with tons of precursor chemicals that could be used in the manufacture of chemical weapons.

A chemical shipment organized by Mr. Haddad's firm -- 1,100 pounds of potassium fluoride, which is used to make sarin, the deadly nerve gas -- was seized by customs officials at Kennedy International Airport in New York in March 1984 as it was about to be loaded onto a jet bound for Europe. The chemicals were ultimately destined for Baghdad, the customs service said, and for the Iraqi Ministry of Pesticides.

Although Mr. Haddad denied involvement in Iraq's chemical weapons programs, disclosure statements filed by the Iraqi government with the United Nations after the Persian Gulf war identified Mr. Haddad's trading company as the source of 60 tons of another precursor chemical for the making of sarin.

Continue reading the main story
Mr. Haddad was never charged with a crime as a result of the shipments to Iraq in the 1980's, a reflection of the far looser American export laws that existed at the time, law-enforcement officials said.

The officials said they had no clear understanding of Mr. Haddad's motivation in assisting the Iraqi government in arms purchases in violation of United Nations sanctions imposed in the 1990's, but they say that old Iraqi loyalties and greed probably played a part.

Before and after the gulf war, Mr. Haddad, a naturalized American citizen, was outspoken in Nashville in his support of Saddam Hussein, describing him as a great leader who had acted properly in invading Kuwait in the summer of 1990. In a 1992 interview with The Tennessean, Mr. Haddad said that he had been ''glad Saddam Hussein took over Kuwait.'' He said that ''Kuwait was an Iraqi land, is an Iraqi land and will always be an Iraqi land.''

Harlan Dodson III, a Nashville lawyer who once represented one of Mr. Haddad's companies, said his former client was ''involved in a variety or businesses, most of which did not work out.''

''I wouldn't say he was flashy,'' he continued. ''He was just a classic entrepreneur. He was the sort of guy who was trying to think of ways to put together a deal to make money. A very creative, very charming guy, very likable guy.''

Mr. Haddad's trading company, Al-Haddad Brothers Enterprises, was a major commodities firm, buying and selling food and mechanical equipment throughout the world in the 1980's and 1990's. Mr. Dodson and others in Nashville said they did not know if Mr. Haddad and others associated with the company had any legal representation in the United States.

Many of the details of Mr. Haddad's arrest in Bulgaria remain unclear, although news reports from Sofia, the capital, have said that he was picked up at the airport on a Turkish Airlines flight from Istanbul. His final destination and reasons for travel through Bulgaria have not been explained.

Continue reading the main story
Bulgarian Interior Ministry officials have said that Mr. Haddad was taken into custody after the police noted his name on a list of people being sought by Interpol on a German arrest warrant.

In the case in Mannheim, Mr. Haddad and the two Germans are accused of trying to acquire 39-foot-long drills for making the giant cannon. At the Germans' trial last week, Mr. Morweiser said the gun would have been ''capable of firing not only conventional, but also nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.''
