

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE U.N.; ARMS  INSPECTORS BACK TOUGH TERMS TO PRESSURE IRAQ
By Julia Preston
Oct. 29, 2002

The leaders of the United Nations weapons inspections teams asked the Security Council today for an aggressive new mandate backed up with a threat of enforcement action, giving the United States a boost in negotiations over its draft resolution to disarm Iraq.

In a closed briefing in the Council, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei questioned some details of the inspection regime Washington has proposed. They appealed strongly to the Council to overcome its disputes and reach consensus on a clear mandate for the inspectors' work.

Speaking to reporters after the session, Mr. Blix said it was important for Iraq to understand that any lack of cooperation ''will call for reactions on the part of the Council, and it has to be not only in the first month, but on a continuous basis.''

In general the weapons inspections chiefs indicated today for the first time to the full 15-member Council that they accepted the inspections terms in the draft resolution offered by the United States and Britain.

Mr. Blix is the head of the United Nations biological and chemical weapons inspection team, and Dr. ElBaradei is the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, which is in charge of nuclear inspections.

American and British diplomats, cheered by the inspectors' remarks, said they were willing to revise their draft to incorporate their criticism. Diplomats on all sides of the tense debate over Iraq said the meeting today seemed to clear the way for broad agreement on the inspections regime, leaving negotiators to focus on the vexing question of if and when to authorize military force.

While President Bush publicly berated the Council nations for dragging out the negotiations, administration officials here at the United Nations emphasized that talks were still progressing and might extend into next week.

In painstaking discussions since Saturday, American and French officials agreed that the resolution would warn in its final paragraphs of ''serious consequences'' to Iraq if it failed to disarm through the inspections, diplomats said. ''Serious consequences'' is Council code for a military attack.

The entire debate, now nearing seven weeks, has boiled down to sharply differing interpretations of the assertion in the American draft that Iraq is in ''material breach'' of past Council measures.

Continue reading the main story
''Council unity is of the greatest importance,'' Mr. Blix said, according to notes from participants in the session. ''We have difficulty in acting with full strength if we feel we do not have the backing of the whole Council.''

Adding some of their own fuel to the ''material breach'' argument, Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei pointed out that Iraq had openly violated past resolutions by barring arms inspectors for the last four years.

''This is not the first time that the Security Council declares Iraq to be in material breach,'' Dr. ElBaradei said, noting that it had done so in a resolution as long ago as August 1991.

Mr. Blix said there would be ''great practical difficulties'' in removing Iraqi weapons experts and their families from their country to interview them, as the draft resolution provides. But he welcomed the authority the draft gives the inspectors to decide how, when and where to conduct the interviews.

Mr. Blix also advised that it would not be practical to expect Iraq to give a complete declaration of all its chemical and biological weapons capacities 30 days after the resolution is adopted, as the draft demands.

The arms chiefs appealed to Council nations to help them with intelligence about which sites to visit, but said they would report the results of their work only to the Council.

Mr. Blix beseeched the Council not to put him in the position where ''we have war and peace in our hands.''

Continue reading the main story
''We report,'' he said. ''It is the Security Council and its members who decide.''

Both men sought to maintain a detached technical position regarding the debate. They did not explicitly advocate an authorization of military force, but made it clear they believed they needed a council commitment to back them up.

In the American draft, the Council declares that Iraq has been for years ''in material breach of its obligations'' to the United Nations. United States officials argue that these words simply repeat what the Council has stated many times before.

But with distrust smoldering here over Washington's pledges that it will not go to war against Iraq until the arms inspectors have done their work, French officials see in these words an explosive ''hidden automatic trigger'' that the United States can use to begin the fight.

''We want clear rules of the game,'' a French diplomat said.

Although the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, threatened over the weekend to challenge the United States by offering a competing resolution, French diplomats made no move to do so here today and the Security Council focused entirely on the American draft.
