


THREATS AND RESPONSES: OPPOSITION; Hussein Foes Meet in London, But Rivalries Fracture Unity
By Craig S. Smith
Dec. 14, 2002

A would-be king, a fugitive financier, warriors and Islamic clerics, idealistic nationalists and jaded generals, spies and, rumor has it, a potential assassin or two, have gathered in London this weekend to draw the political blueprint for a post-Saddam Hussein Iraq -- and to prove to a skeptical world that the splintered Iraqi diaspora can stand united.

But before the Iraqi Opposition Open London Conference had even begun, bickering broke out among the disparate participants. One camp even staged a news conference today in an apparent attempt to set the conference's agenda without the approval of its rivals.

''They are blackmailing and manipulating the process to shove their plan down everybody's throat and embarrass the Americans,'' fumed Laith Kubba, a delegate and former member of the Iraqi National Congress, the umbrella group of exiled Iraqi opponents that held the news conference along with a handful of other delegates.

The opposition meeting had already been delayed for months while various parties haggled over everything from the number of delegates to the venue. The public spat today provided more evidence that while the gathering might be long on theatrics, it could fall short of demonstrating that Mr. Hussein's varied opponents can speak with one voice.

The convention, which some organizers said would include as many as 526 delegates, begins Saturday and is expected to end with a news conference on Monday.

Demonstrating unity is crucial to the Iraqi opposition, which wants to play a decisive role in designing a post-Hussein Iraq. The common denominator linking the groups at the conference is that they do not want the Bush administration to dictate the timetable or the terms of their involvement in governing Iraq after Mr. Hussein is removed from power.

But this array of factions needs the Bush administration to get to that point. And their infighting, both with words and weapons, has long robbed them of unqualified support from the United States, let alone the international community.

Partly for this reason, and partly so the opposition does not interfere with American plans, the United States has counseled the convention organizers to limit their agenda to a show of unity and broad expressions of support for a democratic Iraq.

Each of the main opposition groups enjoys different levels of support from different groups in the United States government; the most visible fault line has the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency on one side and the Defense Department and the White House on the other.


The State Department and the C.I.A. have favored those groups with covert connections to disaffected officials in the current Iraqi government who support the idea of a coup or limited military engagement. Such an approach would leave much of the government intact and allow for a more seamless transition. Chief among the groups in this category is the Iraqi National Accord.

The Defense Department and the White House have favored the exile groups clustered around the Iraqi National Congress and its founder, Ahmed Chalabi, whose Western panache could provide a more palatable and malleable post-Hussein government, in the mode of Hamid Karzai's government in Afghanistan.

The Kurds and Shiite Muslim groups have remained more aloof, because they have clear regional constituencies in Iraq, as well as armed forces on the ground that ensure them a place at the table.

But as it made clear today, the Chalabi faction, the Iraqi National Congress, wants to create what it is calling a ''nucleus transitional authority'' -- before any eventual overthrow of Mr. Hussein.

Mr. Chalabi, a former banker, is wanted in Jordan on charges of fraud and contributing to a collapse of the Jordanian currency in 1989. He says the charges are politically motivated.

Today he and Sharif Ali bin Hussein, a member of Iraq's long-exiled royal family who wants to be king, led a news conference to present a 98-page paper that they described as a draft of the working document for all participants to consider at the opposition meeting.

The ''nucleus transitional authority'' described in the document is the most significant part -- and the most contentious. The Iraqi National Congress envisions in the document that the new ''nucleus authority'' will ''be doubled in size when it moves to Iraq.'' Today it quickly became apparent that there was no broad consensus behind the document, which emerged from a working group of 32 people, representing a variety of Iraqi opposition views.

Continue reading the main story
''I was a member of that working group,'' said Mr. Kubba, who co-founded the National Congress with Mr. Chalabi in 1992 but quit the organization after a bitter dispute with him. ''This draft has not been endorsed by the working group.''

Mr. Kubba also said the draft document and the news conference were part of a plan ''to empower one small group.''

According to several of the delegates, Mr. Chalabi, Mr. Ali and others involved are motivated by a fear of being marginalized by groups that already enjoy strong support inside Iraq. They thus want to secure their place in a transitional government before Mr. Hussein is removed from power, these delegates said.

As the news conference was breaking up, Hoshyar Zebari, a Kurdish official who helped plan the opposition gathering, arrived to explain furiously that the conference had been held without the consent of the other main opposition groups.

Asserting that the steering committee for the conference had its own working document, he said, ''It was unfortunate that some people claimed to represent the conference when they do not.''
