

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq Says It Will Reply To U.N. Arms Queries
By Neil MacFarquhar
Jan. 10, 2003

The Iraqi government said today that it was prepared to answer any questions posed by the United Nations Security Council about its weapons programs, while senior officials here persisted in what appeared to be a concerted effort to undermine the credibility of the weapons inspectors by questioning their methods.

''I think we are telling everything to the inspectors,'' said Mohammed Aldouri, Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, who is currently in Baghdad. ''If there are any minor differences -- right now there aren't any -- but if they think there is something in that direction, we want to know what it is and overcome it.''

At the United Nations, where one of the two chief weapons inspectors, Hans Blix, briefed the Security Council about the inspections to date and Iraq's weapons declaration, both he and the other chief inspector, Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, questioned the Baghdad government's credibility.

''The overall impression is that it is rich in volume but poor in new information about weapons issues and practically devoid of new evidence,'' Mr. Blix said of the arms declaration.

But Iraq maintains that it no longer has either weapons of mass destruction or programs to develop them. Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, the top Iraqi liaison with the inspectors, said today at a a weekly news briefing that Iraq believed the daily weapons inspections were proving it had nothing to hide.

''We are ready to respond to the questions which will be directed to us,'' General Amin said. ''We think that the majority or all of the questions could be resolved during the monitoring phase, during the technical discussions that could be taken between both sides.''

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei are scheduled to deliver a more thorough report on the inspections on Jan. 27, and are due to visit Baghdad in 10 days to discuss some of the outstanding questions before making that report.

Once the initial phase of inspections is over, the resolution that established them envisions a long-term phase of monitoring any possible development sites. Gen. Amir al-Saadi, a chief adviser to President Saddam Hussein, said today that the inspectors would most likely need until the end of March to look at all the sites on their list.

Several senior Iraqi officials said they would use the opportunity of the visit by Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei to register more complaints about the way inspections are being conducted.

Continue reading the main story
''They shouldn't raise questions unrelated to weapons of mass destruction,'' Ambassador Aldouri said.

For example, he said, inspectors visiting bases have been asking about the number of soldiers, as well as the telephone numbers and locations of similar bases around the country.

''They can go there, they can inspect, but they shouldn't raise questions outside their proper mission,'' the ambassador said. ''When they do, it certainly creates some reluctance on the Iraq side.''

Iraq has been avoiding direct confrontations with the inspectors, its officials worried that anything that smacks of resistance will be used by the Bush administration to justify a war.

Mr. Aldouri said the Americans ''want to find a justification to attack Iraq,'' but he added, ''I think they will fail if the inspectors continue to work faithfully.''

A number of senior officials, including General Saadi and Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz, have been raising doubts about the inspectors by portraying their motives as dubious.

Earlier in the week Mr. Hussein accused them of being spies and General Amin echoed him, saying that some of their questions offered proof of spying.

Continue reading the main story
General Saadi complained that on a couple of visits to air bases, the inspectors had asked questions about the command structure -- including who gives orders from outside the base -- as well as about the organizational structure of the base itself and any recently built installations.

''It is within their mandate to inspect military installations,'' Gen. Saadi told a visiting South African delegation recently, ''but whether it is within their mandate to ask these questions, that is another matter.''

The general said it was one thing to ask such questions at the kind of processing plants listed as potential weapons development sites, but quite another to ask them at military sites.

At a time when Iraq is ''threatened with invasion,'' he said, the probing was ''a bit much.''

He added that Iraq had dispatched a letter of protest to the weapons inspectors about such methods and that it expected them to stop. But a spokesmen for the inspectors, both in Baghdad and New York, said they were unfamiliar with any such complaint.

''I don't believe our inspectors have acted inappropriately,'' said Ewen Buchanan, the spokesman for the weapons inspectors at the United Nations. ''But if Iraq has specific complaints, we will look at them.''

No protest letter has been received at United Nations headquarters, he said.

Similarly, Mr. Aziz has complained that while questioning a university professor, the inspectors asked if his salary was sufficient. Mr. Aziz did not elaborate, but he evidently believed the questioner to be implying that the scientist might do better elsewhere.

Iraq has submitted a list of some 500 scientists involved in its weapons programs. The Security Council resolution allows for them to be questioned outside the country, a step amounting to encouraging defection that the inspectors have yet to take.

General Amin said the inspectors had broached the idea of taking scientists to Cyprus for questioning. He said again that although it was up to individual scientists whether they wanted to go, none of them would.
