

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE OPPOSITION; To Build Coalition, U.S. Legislators Tour Iraq's Kurdish Region, Pledging Support
By C. J. Chivers
Dec. 8, 2002

A delegation from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee toured Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq today and pledged American support as part of the coalition being assembled against Saddam Hussein.

It was a bit of high-level American engagement on Iraqi soil, and Kurds appeared pleased with what they heard. Borrowing from a local saying that Kurds have no friends but the mountains, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware and the committee's chairman, told a special session of the Kurdish parliament that ''the mountains are not your only friends.''

The remark was seen as an unmistakable signal of American support, and Senator Biden received a round of grateful applause. Since Mr. Hussein's Baath Party took power in 1968, Iraq's Kurds have endured forced expulsions, mass executions and poison gas attacks. Residing in a dangerous and isolated pocket of the Middle East, they make no secret of their need for friends.

With the possibility of war looming, the Senate delegation is on a weeklong trip visiting leaders in northern Iraq, Jordan, Syria, Turkey and Saudi Arabia, as well as Israel and the Palestinian territories. They will also meet with Gen. Tommy R. Franks of the United States Central Command, which is conducting an exercise in Qatar.

Northern Iraq, with its overwhelming Kurdish population, is a vital area in the event of war, a possible staging ground for American troops and sanctuary for Iraqi refugees. But for Kurds, thoughts of removing Mr. Hussein summon a mix of joy and unease.

Since 1991, when the United States and Britain began enforcing a no-flight zone over much of the Kurdish region, Kurds have created a lively autonomous zone in an area outside Mr. Hussein's control. Iraqi Kurdistan, as the region calls itself, has such instruments of democracy as elections and a free press, and such signs of modernism as cellular phone networks and Internet cafes.

Should Mr. Hussein be removed from power, in all likelihood Kurds would rejoin Iraq, and be reshuffled into a government in which they would be a minority. They worry that much of their gains could be lost. They also worry that if Mr. Hussein senses he is cornered, they would be vulnerable to chemical or biological attacks.

Aware of those misgivings, Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, reassured the parliament that the Kurdish experience could be a model for greater Iraq. ''America is your friend and partner in this exercise,'' he said.

Speaking from a city just a few hours drive from Baghdad, he also delivered a strong message to Mr. Hussein. ''Saddam's regime must be accountable for the crimes against humanity, and the crimes against Iraq's Kurds, that it has committed during his brutal reign,'' he said.


In addition to addressing the legislators, the senators toured a refugee camp, met with aid organizations, and with widows of the village of Barzan, where Iraqi troops seized thousands of boys and men in 1983.

Gurbut Muhammad Ahmed, whose husband is among the vanished, pressed close to the senators and described the day the men were rounded up. Mr. Hussein's troops took all the boys 10 or older, and the elderly and handicapped as well. Almost 20 years have passed, without a word of their fates.

''We want to be told whether they are alive or dead,'' Ms. Ahmed pleaded.

While the message of American support was strong, it was not unconditional, and had its limits. The senators repeatedly turned away questions about whether Kurds might be enlisted to fight alongside American troops, or about providing logistical support or chemical weapons defense for Kurdish fighters and civilians. ''We're not hear to broker war-plan arrangements for the Kurds,'' Senator Hagel said.

Moreover, although the senators encouraged Kurds to expect to be part of a central government in Iraq, they also made clear, in a private session, that American support depended in part on Kurdish behavior.

One American official who attended a closed dinner between the senators and senior Kurdish leaders said Senator Biden emphasized what was expected of the Kurds: that they would participate in a united Iraq, for all ethnicities and parties, and that the two primary Kurdish parties -- the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party -- resist falling back into the civil war they fought in the mid-1990's.

He also told them, the official said, that ''Kurds have to be committed to understanding the concerns of their neighbors'' -- a reference to Turkey.

Turkey, an essential American ally in any significant military action, has told Washington that it worries about Kurdish ambitions in Iraq spreading to its own restive Kurdish minority. Kurds and Turks have also been sparring over the future of Kirkuk, an oil-rich city just south of the current Kurdish zone to which both Kurds and Turks stake claims.

Continue reading the main story
Senator Biden's concern about Kurdish solidarity was evident as he departed, when he told Barham Salih, prime minister of the portion of Kurdistan controlled by the Patriotic Union, and Nechervan Barzani, prime minister of the Kurdish Democratic Party portion: ''Just stay together. Stay together. We need you.''

The United States has behaved inconsistently toward the Kurds in the past, encouraging their troops to action in 1975 and 1991, only to withdraw support. The Baath party routed the Kurds each time.

Mr. Barzani, who admitted that some past experiences with Americans have been bitter, said this time he sensed a difference. ''Now the interests of us, and the United States' interests, are closer together,'' he said.
