

The World; Iraq's Exiled Opposition: Waiting, Watching, Hoping
By Tom Zeller
March 23, 2003

FOR decades, they have waited. Some fled more than 30 years ago, as Iraqi political life died under the Baath Party. Some escaped Saddam Hussein's brutal rule more recently by slipping over the borders. Some were lucky and had their families with them. If they did not, their families were likely murdered.

Other Iraqis -- Shiites, Kurds, Turkomans and Assyrians -- became ghosts and gadflies at the edges of Mr. Hussein's regime, antagonizing the dictator from the mountainous regions of the north or the marshy borderlands near Iran. For the most part, they too have waited.

By some estimates nearly 100 organized political parties, groups and movements make up Iraq's exiled opposition. Many of their members have pursued Western educations and Western lives. They produce more than 40 different publications and administer dozens of Web sites, all lamenting Mr. Hussein's hijacking of their country. They seek and receive patronage from foreign governments, overtly and covertly, from the United States, Iran, Syria and others. Their goals split along dozens of political, ethnic and religious fault lines, and as surely as they have waited through failed coups and partial American interventions, these groups have fought bitterly among themselves about what was until last week still a dreamlike ''what if?''

Now, as American forces descend on Iraq, the question is only ''how soon?''

For more than a year, the various parties have made a show of cooperation, with conferences and coalitions and statements of solidarity. Last August, six prominent parties went to Washington to discuss postwar details with American officials. In December, dozens of groups met in London, where they formed a broad steering committee to help shape Iraq's future. And last week, just hours before the war's opening barrage, two Kurdish groups met with American and Turkish officials in Ankara, where they agreed to cooperate to prevent a postwar free-for-all in the north, where Turks and Kurds have a history of animosity.

Continue reading the main story
For all of that, few believe that hatchets have truly been buried. Instead, the exiles simply know all too well that the Americans will be in control and, eventually, distributing the power.

''Historically, the exiled opposition has been hobbled by divisions over ethnic, religious and political grounds, not to mention personal agendas that often have driven party efforts,'' said Robert Malley, the director of the Middle East program for the International Crisis Group, a global research organization. ''Ironically, though, what is most driving the opposition together today is fear of what the U.S. might do the day after: install a long-term military authority or make use of Iraqis currently within Iraq. In short, not transfer power to the exiled as they had hoped.''

But Mr. Malley and other experts warned that a quick transfer of power to the exiles would have its own hazards. The key to a smooth transition, he said, lies partly in ''resisting the temptation to quickly hand over power to groups that are likely to be viewed as illegitimate by the Iraqi people, such as remnants of the ancien régime or members of the exiled opposition.''

But an American military government, should that be the outcome of this war, could by some estimates last two years or more, and that will be just as likely to brew resentment, not just with Iraqis but with returning opposition groups, some of which will have sizable militias in tow.

''Iraqis won't cede their independence and nationalism to any occupying power,'' said Judith Kipper, a specialist in Middle East affairs with the Council on Foreign Relations. ''Iraq for the Iraqis must be the bedrock of the transition.''

Continue reading the main story
The Bush administration has been careful to keep its plans vague. Various opposition leaders have been courted, favored, dropped and courted again. The Pentagon and State Department have expressed, in a surprisingly public way, differences over their favorites.

''The administration has been very good on this one,'' said Kenneth M. Pollack, the director of research at the Brookings Institution's Saban Center for Middle East Policy. ''It will be critical to have Iraqis helping to administer the country early on, but they have not yet decided who those Iraqis will be, and they recognize that it would be a mistake to try to decide before we are in control of Iraq and can get a better sense of who the Iraqi people would accept.''

WHICH is partly why the opposition groups have been busy trying to demonstrate their broadmindedness. That may prove harder than many of them realize, particularly when they are finally able to slip out of the shadows, re-enter Iraq and confront the grim realities that 30 years of repression have kept largely hidden.

In an open letter distributed recently to various e-mail lists in the United States and Europe, Kanan Makiya, a leading Iraqi dissident, responded to what he said was a growing sense that some of his fellow exiles were failing to grasp ''the facts of life for the next generation in this poor, unhappy and ravaged land.''

''Some of you think you can lift your noses and ride into Iraq on the American tanks, above the stink'' of what the Baath Party has made of the country, he said. But, he continued: ''You cannot. That is a pipe dream. The Americans will be here for the shortest time they can possibly get away with, and they will not understand during that time, nor even are they capable of imagining, exactly what it is they are dealing with.''