

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Kurds Hope U.S. Bombs Hit Militants, Not Home
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 17, 2003

Mullah Marwan Ismail Hussein, his beard gray and long and his eyes green and tired, sat in a courtyard outside the Ibn Taymiyya Mosque and shared a sentiment now common here.

You would think, he said, that ''a great politician like Colin Powell should have looked at a map.''

The mullah might have spoken for much of this village along Iraq's mountainous border with Iran. This is a place filled with worry because of one careless word.

In an address to the United Nations Security Council on Feb. 5, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell displayed a satellite photograph of what he described as a poison factory and terrorist camp that has received support from both the Iraqi government and Al Qaeda's terrorist network.


The photograph, offered as a reason to consider risking war to topple Mr. Hussein, carried a caption that bore this village's name, Khurmal.

The camp in question, however, is actually in Sarget, a 35-minute drive away and on the other side of a military front, in territory occupied by Ansar al-Islam, a militant Islamic group the United States says is an affiliate of Al Qaeda.

Since the slide was shown to the world, American officials have said they know where the Ansar camp really is, and describe the caption as a label never meant to confuse.

They note the distance between Sarget and Khurmal is only about four miles, and Khurmal, by far the larger village, was a convenient marker for a public not exactly familiar with the geography of northern Iraq, an area independent from Mr. Hussein but still largely isolated from the world.

''We know exactly where the place is located,'' said one senior State Department official. ''It's just like we talk about the Pentagon being in Washington, when it is in Virginia.''

Continue reading the main story
From the insulating distance of Washington, a few miles was close enough, and to hear American officials tell it, there seems virtually no chance the Pentagon regards Khurmal as a potential Al Qaeda target.

But to villagers in Khurmal, the mislabeling was frightening, and their fear is an indicator of America's low credibility when it comes to distinguishing military and civilian targets.

Khurmal, with a population of roughly 7,500, was once a part of a savage front in the Iran-Iraq war, and its environs are polluted with trenches and hidden mines. The village itself was razed by Mr. Hussein in the late 1980's.

Recently rebuilt, it is little more than a cinderblock shanty town, an impoverished municipality sitting squarely on a front between the Kurdish fighters and Ansar. It is controlled by a comparatively moderate Muslim group, Komala Islami Kurdistan, a party that has resisted Ansar's jihad politics but distrusts the United States.

Many people here clustered into homes with generator-powered televisions to watch Mr. Powell's presentation, and said they were astonished to see their village named as the nexus between Osama bin Laden and Mr. Hussein.

Long a luckless place, Khurmal, now fully expects to be struck by American bombs. ''We have seen this kind of mistake in Afghanistan, when the Americans bombarded the wrong villages,'' said Sheik Ali Bapir, the leader of Komala. ''The people of Khurmal are very helpless and very poor. Please do not make any mistake.''

The village's poverty is staggering, its birth rate is high and its citizens are deeply committed to an Islamist order. Residents say they support a war to unseat Mr. Hussein but are discomfited by the United States.

Continue reading the main story
''We are not with Saddam,'' said Ibrahim Ali Karim, 28, a laborer and father of four children. ''But we don't want America to destroy our lives.''

Mullah Hussein, whose mosque is located in an alley where garbage drifts slowly through puddles, said he has no faith in the Bush administration's public reasons for wanting to change the Iraqi regime.

If the United States was genuinely opposed to chemical weapons and intent on removing them, the mullah said, it could have attacked Iraq in 1988, when it was using nerve and mustard gas against Kurds in this same valley. He noted that America was Mr. Hussein's ally then.

''The conflict is just to monopolize the petrol,'' he said. ''The United States wants the whole world to be one colony of itself.''

Among the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the secular party that governs most of the eastern Kurdish zone, the Komala party is regarded as not entirely neutral. The Kurdish government advises Westerners not to enter the village, saying it is heavily infiltrated by Ansar's militants, at least 150 of whom have families here that they visit almost every day.

In turn, Komala members say Kurdish authorities have tried to strangle them into loyalty by cutting off electricity, reducing the flow of international aid, and establishing checkpoints where Khurmal residents are sometimes beaten -- as was one young man in front of journalists on a recent trip.

Sheik Ali Bapir warns that with Mr. Powell's presentation, American credibility in this valley, already low, is at a greater risk.

Continue reading the main story
He suggested that if America does attack, it would be wise for its weapons to be more precise than the words on Mr. Powell's slide. This is a place, he said, where the population could break either way.

''If we are hit by fire that is meant to burn Ansar, the United States would turn us from a popular party to a party that is against them,'' he said. ''It is better to have friends than to have enemies.''
