

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | IRAQI PORT; Seals Clear Mines in Vital Harbor
By James Dao
March 28, 2003

After a week of round-the-clock searches for snipers' nests and mine caches, Naval Special Warfare forces declared today that they had secured the waterways surrounding Iraq's lone deep-sea port at Umm Qasr, paving the way for a British cargo ship to deliver aid as early as Friday.

But Navy officials cautioned that they might still have to clear a few more mines in the area before the ship, the Sir Galahad -- which is moored in the Persian Gulf -- could deliver its cargo of food and other supplies.

The British hope to open 12 aid distribution centers in southern Iraq once the ship unloads its cargo at the sprawling container port.

''The port of Umm Qasr is secure,'' said Capt. Walter S. Pullar III, the deputy commander of the Naval Special Warfare Task Group, which is overseeing the operation. ''Our mission here is completed.''

Throughout the day, heavily armed Navy Special Operations forces in jet-propelled gunboats could be seen darting back and forth along the narrow waters of the Khawr Az Zubayr, which links Umm Qasr to the Tigris River system to the north.

But in a clear sign that the Naval Special Forces mission here is winding down, a Navy patrol craft and a pair of United States Coast Guard boats could also be seen patrolling the entrance to Umm Qasr.

Navy commandos have also handed over control of their northern-most checkpoint above Umm Qasr at the Khawr Az Zubayr naval base to British Royal Marines. In deference to Britain's major role in this region, the Navy Seals code-named the checkpoint Hooker, a rugby term.

Navy commanders had feared that the Iraqi military was planning to use some of the abandoned ships that litter the waterway to hide weapons and shelter snipers, or as staging grounds for planting mines around Umm Qasr and in the northern Persian Gulf.

Earlier this week, a Navy Special Boat team found 12 500-pound Italian-made mines in a small Iraqi merchant vessel known as a dhow. The team detonated the mines, setting off an explosion that could be heard 50 miles away in Kuwait.

Continue reading the main story
Navy Seals and Special Boat teams have also taken at least a dozen Iraqi prisoners off abandoned boats in the waterways near Umm Qasr. American officials said it was not clear whether those prisoners were soldiers trying to flee combat in the Fao region or Iraqi commandos plotting to mount guerrilla attacks against American and British forces around Umm Qasr or in Fao.

The Navy Seals -- which is the informal name for the Sea-Air-Land units -- handed over the Iraqi prisoners to British Royal Marines at Umm Qasr for detention.

Navy ships and helicopters have for several days been dragging mine-detecting sleds like lawn mowers across the northern Persian Gulf and into the Khawr Abdullah, the channel linking the gulf to Umm Qasr.

Today, Navy divers set off charges that destroyed at least three mines a few miles from Umm Qasr.

The Navy has also brought in a team of mine-hunting dolphins to assist in the sweep. A small boat carrying one of the dolphins could be seen operating near Umm Qasr's southernmost piers this afternoon.

Securing the waters near Umm Qasr has emerged as a central mission for Navy Seals and Special Boat crews, who have battled harsh weather and exhaustion to search more than 70 abandoned ships over the past week.

During one storm on Tuesday night, crews on MK-V gunboats, smaller speed boats known as Ribs, and specially outfitted riverboats were lashed throughout the night by six-foot waves and hurricane-force winds that exceeded 65 knots.

The high seas damaged at least two of the boats and left crews bailing knee-deep water in many of the others. Nevertheless, most of the boats remained on patrol for 24 consecutive hours.

Continue reading the main story
Derelict ships, ranging from oil tankers to wooden fishing boats to barges, have turned parts of the Khawr Az Zubayr into a treacherous obstacle course.

''This is where the graveyard begins,'' said Lt. j.g. Jake Heller as a patrol boat passed a pair of ghostly ships, one turned on its side like a beached whale.

Some of the ships were abandoned at the start of the American military campaign last week by owners fearful of striking mines or being bombed. But many others date back to the first Persian Gulf war of 1991 or even the Iran-Iraq war of the late 1980's, Navy officers said.

A patrol with a Special Boat detachment today indicated that the remnants of Iraq's small navy seemed to have fled the Khawr Az Zubayr.

The naval station was a ghost town, a row of towering container cranes standing as still as statues. Several Seals and Special Boat crewmen armed with .45-caliber pistols and M-4 carbines scoured more than a dozen small boats beached near the station but found nothing.

A team of Polish commandos working with the Navy also boarded a large fishing trawler moored in the middle of the river after spotting people on board. The Poles quickly turned up 14 Iraqi crew members, who were frisked and briefly interrogated.

But the boarding party found nothing suspicious on the ship and let the crew go, convinced they were simply waiting for the war to end before resuming their passage to the Persian Gulf.

As the American boats pulled away, the Iraqis gathered on the bow of their rusted ship and waved, looking happy and more than a little relieved.
