

A NATION AT WAR: THE QUARRY; Signs Point to Hussein on Tape, Officials Say
By James Risen
March 21, 2003

United States intelligence officials said today that there were indications that the individual on a videotape released after the American attack on Iraq last night was Saddam Hussein, although no final analytical conclusion had been reached.

The videotape is crucial to efforts by the C.I.A. to determine whether the Iraqi leader is dead or alive, one day after American forces attacked a bunker where Mr. Hussein was believed to have been meeting with some of his senior lieutenants.

''We have not reached a conclusion on whether it is him,'' an official said.

Even if it was Mr. Hussein, the officials cautioned that it was possible that the videotape had been prerecorded for use after the start of the war.

The tape, of a televised address given by a man identified as Mr. Hussein, was released in Iraq just hours after the United States launched the attack intended to kill the Iraqi leadership.

The appearance of the man who gave the speech, looking haggard and wearing thick glasses, was different enough from other recent photos of Mr. Hussein that it has raised questions about whether the Iraqi leader survived the attack.

American intelligence officials said that they were not certain whether Mr. Hussein was in the bunker at the time of the attack and had not determined who was killed in the raid. They believe, however, that the United States hit the right building, where an intelligence informant had said the leadership was expected that night, and officials said they believed that several members of the Iraqi leadership were there and were killed.

''There was good information suggesting that it was target opportunity'' in which to kill the Iraqi leadership, an official said.

There was evidence today that the Iraqi leadership's ability to communicate with its military had been damaged as a result of the attack, the officials added.

The painstaking technical analysis of the tape is similar to the work the agency has been forced to conduct over the past year on a series of videotapes and audiotapes said to be issued by Osama bin Laden to determine whether they were forgeries designed to convince the United States that the terrorist leader was still alive.

Continue reading the main story
C.I.A. analysts were trying to match the voice on the Iraqi videotape last night to past speeches by Mr. Hussein. They are also believed to be using facial recognition analysis to compare the tape with earlier video images of the Iraqi leader.

The technology used by experts in facial and voice recognition is sophisticated, but it is not an exact science, and in some cases it can take several days for specialists to reach a consensus, particularly if outside experts are brought in, as they were when the C.I.A. scrutinized the tapes said to be from Mr. bin Laden.

The questions about the televised address supposedly given by Mr. Hussein after the raid centered on whether the speech had been given by a double posing as him. There have been reports for years that Mr. Hussein and at least one of his sons, Uday, have used body doubles for security reasons.

But American intelligence officials said today that the C.I.A. had never been able to confirm reports of a wide use of doubles, and believed they were exaggerated.

The C.I.A. has determined that he has used decoys who stand in for him in motorcades and similar situations in which a man who was not an exact double could be mistaken for him. But the agency's analysts have never definitively concluded that he has used doubles to give speeches or make television appearances, where the likeness could be closely studied.

''We have been skeptical that he has used doubles on television in the past, but that doesn't rule out the possibility that it was done in this instance,'' an official said.

C.I.A. analysts are remaining cautious in trying to determine whether Mr. Hussein survived the attack because the Iraqi leader has been successful at protecting himself against assassination and is obsessed with his personal security, American intelligence officials say.

Continue reading the main story
''This is a man who is extremely wary about being betrayed,'' said Jerrold Post, the founding director of C.I.A.'s Center for Analysis of Personality and Political Behavior, who is now the director of the political psychology program at George Washington University.

The voice and facial recognition technology being used to determine whether it was Mr. Hussein on the tape has limitations that make the job of the analysts difficult.

Robert Rodman, a professor at North Carolina State University and a voice recognition expert, said that it was extremely difficult to gain complete confidence about the identity of a voice.

''People talk about voiceprinting, but it is not like a fingerprint,'' Mr. Rodman said. ''You don't get the same confidence level you get from a fingerprint. The fundamental problem is that an individual will speak differently on different occasions and those differences are sometimes as great as the differences between two individuals.''

Facial recognition carries the same limitations, particularly when analysts have to rely on a videotape of poor quality, said Bob Schmitt, senior vice president of facial recognition for Visage, a Littleton, Mass., company that provides facial recognition technology to the federal government.

''The whole key to any biometric measure, whether it is voice or facial, is how good is the quality of the image, and the quality of the images you have in your files of the person to compare the new image against,'' said Mr. Schmitt.
