

THREATS AND RESPONSES: LOOKING AHEAD; White House Assembles Officials to Review Plan to Rebuild Iraq After a War
By Judith Miller
Feb. 23, 2003

The Bush administration's new office of postwar planning held a secret session this weekend to assess the government's plans for securing and rebuilding Iraq if Saddam Hussein is overthrown, senior administration officials said today.

The classified two-day meeting, called a rehearsal, was held in the vast Eisenhower Hall of the National Defense University in Washington, officials said. It drew about 100 officials from nearly a dozen agencies, including the Departments of State, Treasury and Agriculture, and the White House's Office of Management and Budget, each of which would be responsible for a different mission in a postwar Iraq.

Officials from allied countries that have supported Washington on Iraq were also invited, officials said. The rehearsal ended today.

''The goal is to integrate work that has been done in a number of areas, such as civil administration and reconstruction,'' said Douglas J. Feith, the under secretary of defense for policy, who described the structure and goals of the new Pentagon-led office in an interview on Friday.

The administration has been criticized by Congress for being slow to begin this process.

One conclusion, an official said, was that although some funds have already been allocated through various agencies for civilian assistance in the event of war, Washington may well need to spend far more than anticipated for this purpose.

The review came as United Nations inspectors were pressing a showdown with Mr. Hussein by demanding that, within a week, Iraq begin destroying a group of missiles and rockets that the inspectors say exceeded their allowed range of 92 miles. If Mr. Hussein refuses, the Bush administration may have an easier time building support for a new resolution it intends to offer concluding that Iraq does not intend to meet requirements to disarm.

In another move related to possible postwar planning, President Bush's special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, Zalmay Khalilzad, and a small group of American officials left on Friday night for Turkey. Early next week, they are scheduled to attend the first opposition meeting on Iraqi soil in more than a decade.

American officials said the trip had been delayed at least a day by Turkey's initial refusal to permit the American delegation's security officials to cross from Turkey into northern Iraq. A senior Turkish official said his country had been reluctant to allow what he called the delegation's ''small army'' of security officials into northern Iraq.

Several officials who attended the postwar planning meetings praised them, saying they had highlighted strengths -- and equally important, crucial deficiencies -- in the plans, which have been compiled by various agencies in recent weeks and months. ''This was a dispassionate view of where we stand, what needs to be fixed, and what was forgotten,'' said one official who attended the session on Friday.

Continue reading the main story
Mr. Feith and other officials denied charges that the administration had waited too long to organize the office, known as the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance. Last fall, he said, officials were emphasizing President Bush's decision to use the United Nations to encourage Mr. Hussein to rid his country of weapons of mass destruction. Creating a post-Hussein office would have fostered a ''misimpression,'' Mr. Feith said, that the administration was not committed to disarming Mr. Hussein through peaceful means, rather than war.

Mr. Feith said the Pentagon was the natural agency to lead the office because it would need to work closely with the Florida-based military command, whose officers have been drafting plans to secure the country and Iraq's borders, hunt down and eliminate weapons of mass destruction and perform other security tasks.

The postwar planning office's mission would not be to run Iraq, Mr. Feith said, but to coordinate relief and reconstruction efforts by domestic and foreign agencies.

He also said the administration would want to involve coalition partners, and perhaps even the United Nations, in getting Iraq back on its feet. No specific decisions have been made about how this would be done, or with whom, he added, nor have they been made on many other major issues.

''Many of these are open questions, and a lot depends on events,'' Mr. Feith said.

The new office is directed by Jay Garner, a retired general who held a senior military position in the relief operation in northern Iraq in 1991. He declined to be interviewed. He is charged with organizing and integrating the work of three areas: civilian aid, reconstruction, and civil administration or governance.

Officials said Michael Mobbs, a lawyer and former legal associate of Mr. Feith, had been asked to oversee civil administration. Mr. Mobbs recently argued in an unsuccessful legal brief that Yasser Esam Hamdi, a terrorism suspect, could be detained as an enemy combatant.

David A. Kay, a former chief nuclear weapons inspector in Iraq and now a senior fellow at the Potomac Institute for Policy Studies, confirmed in an interview that he had considered taking the post. He said he had decided against it because of competing commitments.

Continue reading the main story
But associates said Mr. Kay was worried about the office's prospects. They said he had complained that promoting democracy had too little priority in the new office, and that the mission itself was underfinanced and poorly staffed. Bureaucratic rivalries were already intense, he told friends, and the office had too few recruits who knew Iraq well.

Officials said the office would be moved to the region -- possibly to Doha, the capital of Qatar -- if war began, before relocating inside Iraq.
