

A NATION AT WAR: NORTHERN FRONT; U.S. Opens Command in Northern Iraq
By David Rohde With C. J. Chivers
March 25, 2003

American military officials said today that they had established a new military command in northern Iraq. The move appeared to be part of the effort to dissuade Turkey from sending its troops into Iraq.

American officials have said a Turkish move into Iraq could set off clashes between Turkish and Kurdish soldiers and possibly complicate American war plans. But Turkish officials say their forces are needed to deliver aid, stabilize the area and prevent refugees from flooding over its border as they did after the first Persian Gulf war in 1991.

In a brief, tightly scripted news conference this afternoon, Maj. Gen. Henry P. Osman of the United States Marine Corps said his new command would do many of the tasks the Turkish military had outlined for itself in northern Iraq.

The general, whose arrival pleased Kurdish officials, said his command would coordinate the efforts of American, Turkish and Kurdish forces and promote the work of aid groups.

''This is all part of the U.S. effort to support humanitarian assistance efforts and coordinate U.S. and international activities,'' General Osman said, ''and provide a stabilizing influence in northern Iraq.''

In Ankara, a special American envoy met with Turkish officials today to try to steer them away from sending troops into Iraq, and European Union leaders suggested that Turkish military incursions could hurt Turkey's frustrated bid to join the organization.

In addition, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain reiterated what President Bush said on Sunday: that the coalition forces waging war in Iraq were adamantly opposed to any independent military actions by Turkish troops.

''It would be entirely unacceptable for there to be any incursion,'' Mr. Blair told Parliament today.

At his news conference here, General Osman declined to answer questions, and it was unclear what role, if any, his command would play in opening a northern front in the American invasion of Iraq. A day after American military cargo planes ferried Special Operations soldiers and equipment into northern Iraq, American jets continued to bomb positions around the northern cities of Kirkuk and Mosul today.

Continue reading the main story
Near Kirkuk, at least five bombs or missiles struck the ridge near the town of Chamchamal today, and an Iraqi ambulance appeared near a bunker there after the strikes. Explosions could also be heard intermittently from Kirkuk.

To the north, several bombs hit the village of Pir Daud, between Kirkuk and Mosul. And bombs struck near Shaykhan, on the front line north of Mosul.

Kurdish officials adamantly oppose a Turkish incursion, while Turkish officials have made it clear that they do not trust the Kurds. Over the last several weeks, the two sides have massed their troops on the border, and Kurdish officials have issued orders for their men to fire on advancing Turks. It is believed that Turkish tanks would quickly overwhelm lightly armed Kurdish forces.

General Osman said he had met with Turkish military officials in Ankara and Kurdish military officials in Dohuk. He said he arrived on Sunday in Salahuddin, a mountain resort that is the home base of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which controls the western half of the Kurdish zone in northern Iraq.

Turkish officials fear that if Kurds gain control of Kirkuk, and its oil, in a post-Saddam Hussein Iraq and flourish, it could reignite separatist desires among Turkey's Kurdish minority. The Turkish military put down a Kurdish insurrection in southeastern Turkey in the 1990's.

Kurdish and American forces are expected to launch a joint ground attack soon against Ansar al Islam, a militant Islamic group that the State Department says has links to Al Qaeda. This weekend American planes and missiles bombarded the group's small enclave, which sits between Kurdish and Iraqi government lines near the Iranian border.

In the initial attack against Ansar, American cruise missiles also struck the offices of another Islamic group, Komali Islami Kurdistan, which controls Khurmal, the town adjacent to Ansar territory, with hundreds of gunmen of its own.

Continue reading the main story
Komali is a comparatively moderate Islamic party, and it had maintained relations with the secular government and publicly embraced a position of neutrality. Its emir, Mullah Ali Bapir, had traveled freely in the region.

At least 64 of Komali's fighters died when American bombs struck their offices and barracks, officials said. Since these attacks, Khurmal has become extraordinarily tense, with civilians fleeing and Ansar fighters mingling with Komali fighters. A suicide car bomber leaving the town killed an Australian journalist and several Kurds on Saturday.

The Kurdish government is now concerned that Komali's fighters may have been driven into Ansar's ranks, perhaps doubling Ansar's strength. Ansar fields an estimated 650 fighters. Komali is thought to have 700 to 1,200 fighters.

A senior Kurdish official said tonight that Kurds were negotiating with Komali, offering it safe passage to the northern town of Qaladze.

In a curious twist, the negotiations are being mediated by Iranian intelligence officials, the official said, putting Iran in the position of brokering a deal that could reduce the number of combatants Americans face.

''The priority for us is to get these fighters out of the region,'' the Kurdish official said. ''We don't want to fight so many guns at the same time.''

Mullah Bapir, said to be shaken by the American attacks and both grief-stricken and enraged, was meeting late tonight to consider the offer.

The official said, however, that even if the group decided to accept safe passage, some of its members, infuriated by the attacks, were sure to remain with Ansar.
