

A NATION AT WAR: NORTHERN IRAQ; Bombs Explode in Cities South of Kurdish Region and in Areas Held by Militant Group
By C. J. Chivers With David Rohde
March 22, 2003

Explosions reverberated in northern Iraq tonight as cities and military targets just south of the autonomous Kurdish region were subjected to intense American aerial bombardment, and a similar attack was launched against Islamic militants near the Iranian border.

In some places along the northern Iraq front, the night sky was briefly illuminated by the flashes of tracers from Iraqi antiaircraft guns. In others, it was brightened for hours by the glowing of fires that apparently burned unchecked after bombs or missiles struck.

Kurdish officials, who were in contact with informants inside the portion of Iraq controlled by Saddam Hussein, said American bombs landed in the cities of Kirkuk and Mosul, as well as at least one Iraqi airport, a sprawling Republican Guard military base and the headquarters of an Iraqi Army corps near the city of Jalawla.

A smaller bombardment also began against positions near the isolated villages held by Ansar al-Islam, a militant Islamic group that the United States claims is connected to Al Qaeda. Since forming in 2001, the group, thought to have about 650 fighters, has waged a small but brutal war against the secular Kurdish government, and deployed suicide bombers and assassins into Kurdish villages and cities.

Limited airstrikes were heard or reported earlier in the day. But the bombardments tonight brought a renewed vigor to the northern front, mostly quiet since attacks against Mr. Hussein's government began two days ago.

Kurds, who have long been persecuted by Mr. Hussein and oppose him with palpable bitterness, said they were overjoyed at tonight's large-scale assault.

''Let America bomb all of them,'' said Sarkawt Kuba, the security chief in the Sulaimaniya region. ''For 50 years they bombed us. Now let America bomb them all.''

In Sulaimaniya, the capital of the eastern Kurdish zone, some Kurdish officials, usually seen in sport coats and ties, appeared after darkness in the traditional battle dress of Kurdish guerrillas: baggy wool pants, cummerbunds and cartridge belts. They carried pistols or automatic rifles.

Kurdish officials said the headquarters of the Iraqi Army's II Corps, located southwest of here in Mansuriya, had been struck early in the attacks.

Continue reading the main story
And at Kalak, a village just east of Mosul, journalists reported seeing antiaircraft fire and several bright flashes to the south of Mosul, where its airport lies.

At Chamchamal, a village just east of Kirkuk, the booms thundered. Two hours after the first rumbles were heard, the sky glowed red on the horizon. Columns of smoke rose in the still night air.

Kurdish officials said the attacks in Kirkuk were directed, at a minimum, against the Khalid Republican Guard base, to Kirkuk's west, and at an airfield used by Iraqi military planes.

From the village of Halabja, a Kurdish general reported seeing at least five explosions at Ansar positions and checkpoints. He said he believed that the explosions were caused by missiles.

Meanwhile, teams from American Special Forces were seen visiting the front near both Kirkuk and Mosul throughout the day.

A team that arrived at this tiny, abandoned village traveled in three civilian sport utility vehicles with tinted windows. After arriving accompanied by local Kurdish militia, the Americans moved forward to a large bunker and observed the Iraqi forces, peering from behind an earthen berm with what seemed to be a large spotting scope or range finder.

It appeared that the soldiers might be acting as forward controllers for airstrikes. The Kurds prohibited access, and forbade two journalists to approach close, allowing them only to watch with binoculars.

Continue reading the main story
A Kurdish security official said only that the Americans were doing ''special business.''

Also this afternoon, what appeared to be an American Special Forces team encampment was seen in a small village on the front line northeast of Kirkuk. Three large white Toyota Land Cruisers surrounded a small mud-brick house with plastic sheets on its windows.

Several large antennas with wires running into the house sat on the roofs of the vehicles. A brand-new Honda generator sat on the ground outside. Kurdish soldiers blocked access to the house, barred a photographer from taking pictures but confirmed the presence of Americans.

Later still, journalists spotted a convoy of three white land cruisers escorted by two vehicles full of Kurdish soldiers speeding toward the front line east of Mosul.

Kurdish officials said Special Forces units had been moving along the border with Kirkuk for the last three days. One official said the Americans were trying to convey a message to Iraqi soldiers on front lines around Mosul.

''He sent them a message,'' he said. ''The American Army is here, if you want to surrender, go ahead and surrender.''

Dr. Barham Salih, prime minister of the eastern Kurdish zone, said meanwhile that dozens of members of the Kurdish underground in Kirkuk, which he said has been planning resistance and an uprising against Mr. Hussein's ruling Baath Party, had been rounded up and executed by Mr. Hussein's security forces.

The executions, by firing squad, had occurred on Wednesday at the Khalid Republican Guard base outside the city, officials said.

Continue reading the main story
Word of them had reached Kurdish officials today. The reports of a summary execution could not be independently confirmed, although Kurdish officials said they had multiple agents reporting it.

''Sixty-one people have been executed all together, at one time,'' said Shalaw Askari, a senior member of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.

Mr. Askari said the underground members were discovered after some of their peers were caught last week trying to use satellite phones.
