

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DEMOCRATS; United Voice on Iraq Eludes Majority Leader
By David E. Rosenbaum
Oct. 4, 2002

Like his party, Senator Tom Daschle, the Democratic leader, seems to be struggling to find his voice as the Senate begins its debate on Iraq.

As a crucial election approaches that will determine whether Democrats maintain control of the Senate and he keeps his job as majority leader, Mr. Daschle is facing an uncomfortable reality: The Iraq debate is so dominating the political landscape that it is hard for his party's candidates to be heard on the bread-and-butter issues that work to their advantage.

Further complicating the situation, Mr. Daschle's party in the Senate is divided. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, the 2000 vice-presidential nominee, and many other prominent Democratic senators are supporting President Bush without reservation. Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, still the party's liberal standard-bearer, argues that the president has not made the case for a pre-emptive strike against Iraq. And Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, perhaps the Democrats' most respected intellect in the Senate, holds that military intervention in Iraq should not be authorized until the United Nations approves it.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee and thus the Democrats' ex officio spokesman in the Senate on foreign policy, stands somewhere between the hawks and the doves.

Mr. Biden and Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, are offering a proposal that would authorize military action, but only against Iraq and not any other country, and only to rid Iraq of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

Mr. Daschle came under increased pressure on Wednesday when the president and Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House Democratic leader, announced they had reached agreement on a resolution that would give Mr. Bush wide latitude to decide when and under what circumstances to begin a war.

Normally a sure-footed politician, Mr. Daschle seemed off-balance on Wednesday. He was conspicuously absent when Mr. Bush and Mr. Gephardt announced their agreement at the White House. He canceled a scheduled news conference and avoided questions all day about Iraq.

But this morning, Mr. Daschle seemed back in stride. At a news conference, he said he had reservations about the agreement Mr. Bush and Mr. Gephardt had cut, but he emphasized that he was ''confident that at the end of the day, we're going to be able to develop a broad bipartisan consensus.''

Mr. Daschle said his view was that the president should be authorized to launch a strike unilaterally only after all efforts to work through the United Nations had been exhausted. He also said the only ground for a pre-emptive strike should be to disarm Iraq -- not, for instance, to overthrow Saddam Hussein or protect oil fields.

Continue reading the main story
In that vein, Mr. Daschle said he would vote for the Biden-Lugar proposal. But that measure is sure to be rejected. Mr. Daschle said he did not know whether he would then support the Bush resolution, which the House is expected to approve next week. If he concludes ''there is no way additional improvements are possible,'' Mr. Daschle said, ''I'll have to reassess the circumstances''

In any event, Mr. Daschle said the votes on Iraq were not a matter on which Democratic senators were expected to exercise party loyalty. ''Every senator has to make his or her own judgment,'' he said.

The divisions among Democratic senators today are not unlike those during the Vietnam War.

Then, there were prominent hawks like John C. Stennis and Henry M. Jackson and equally prominent doves like J. W. Fulbright and George S. McGovern. Another similarity is that several Democratic senators (including Mr. Jackson and Mr. McGovern) were considering running for president.

The majority leader at the time, Mike Mansfield, was solidly on the side of the doves. But unlike Mr. Daschle, Mr. Mansfield was an authority on foreign affairs with a freedom to speak his mind that Mr. Daschle does not enjoy.

Ever since Vietnam, Republicans have made political hay by portraying Democrats as soft on defense, and polls usually show that the public has more confidence in Republicans to handle foreign and military policy. With that in mind, many Democrats, especially those in tough election campaigns, have been wary about being seen as against war.

Many Democrats say the divisions in the party could work against them in the election next month. But one prominent Democratic lawmaker said the events this week could be advantageous. In his view, Mr. Gephardt, by supporting the president, has inoculated Democrats against the charge that they are antiwar and obstructionist. And Mr. Daschle is responding to the sense of many Americans that questions still need to be asked about policy on Iraq.

Mr. Daschle and Mr. Gephardt expressed admiration for each other today and said their disagreement on Iraq did not reflect a fundamental split in the party's leadership.

Continue reading the main story
At his own news conference, Mr. Gephardt said he was conflicted in a way politicians rarely acknowledge after they have taken a stand. ''I wish I knew enough to know the absolute right thing to do,'' he said. ''Does anyone know the right thing to do or the successful thing that will work here? I doubt it.''

With Mr. Gephardt's endorsement, the Bush resolution is sure to pass the House with strong Democratic support. But one who will not vote for it is Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the Democratic whip. ''I do not believe we have exhausted all diplomatic remedies,'' she declared.
