

A NATION CHALLENGED: DIPLOMACY; Iraqis Seek to Oust Hussein With U.S. Military Training
By Michael R. Gordon
Feb. 1, 2002

Iraqi opposition leaders have asked the Bush administration to provide military training to insurgents trying to overthrow Saddam Hussein, the opposition leaders said today.

In meetings with top State and Defense Department officials in the last two days, the Iraqi opposition has renewed its appeal for a program of military training. The idea is to train selected Iraqi opposition commanders in the United States who would in turn provide training to insurgents in Iraq.

An official with the Iraqi National Congress, as the opposition group is known, said he expected the Bush administration to back the training plan in light of President Bush's State of the Union address in which he characterized Iraq, Iran and North Korea as an ''axis of evil.'' But a senior American official said that the State Department had not dropped its longstanding view that the training plan was impractical.

The Bush administration has offered support for several other initiatives, Iraqi opposition leaders say, including a meeting in Washington of former Iraqi military officers to discuss plans to unseat Mr. Hussein and a political conference of Iraqi opposition leaders to discuss the country's future if the Iraqi leader is deposed.

The Bush administration's meetings with the Iraqi opposition illustrates the situation it faces as it seeks to balance its tough oratory about Iraq, Iran and North Korea with the concerns of allies, fearful that the administration is elevating military options above diplomacy.

Seeking to reassure American allies and to avoid details about a policy that has yet to be fleshed out, President Bush and his top aides have avoided direct references to potential military action. Today, Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, gave a speech in which she underscored that the United States wanted to work with its allies to deal with threats posed by Iraq, Iran and North Korea and listed the nonmilitary steps they could take. These included strengthening export controls, encouraging the Russians to stop the leakage of their missile or nuclear technology and developing antimissile defenses. Ms. Rice alluded to military options in the vaguest of terms, saying the United States would ''use every tool at our disposal to meet this grave global threat.''

Administration officials say that military force would not be a desirable way to confront North Korea or Iran. But an energetic debate is under way in the administration about the use of military force to topple Mr. Hussein. Mr. Bush has vowed to take tough, if unspecified action, if Baghdad pursues developing weapons of mass destruction. But his administration has not completed its review of Iraqi policy, and Defense and State Department officials have been divided about the credibility of the Iraqi National Congress.

Civilian Pentagon officials favor a plan in which the model of the Afghan campaign would be adapted to Iraq and expanded. Iraqi insurgents would do the brunt of the fighting though American Special Forces would probably be deployed. American air power would pummel Mr. Hussein's military. But it is widely agreed that Iraqi insurgents are not nearly as capable as the Northern Alliance was in Afghanistan.

To create a military option, the Iraqi National Congress has long sought training in antitank warfare, calling in American airstrikes and in the use of military police to control newly conquered territory. So an important issue before the Bush administration now is whether the United States should take on the task of training Iraqi insurgents, as Pentagon civilians would like, or whether the military option is impractical.

Continue reading the main story
Led by Ahmad Chalabi, a founder of the Iraqi National Congress, the Iraqi opposition leaders met recently with Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz and Marc Grossman, the undersecretary of state for political affairs, among others.

Referring to the request for military training, Mr. Chalabi said, ''There were no specific developments on that subject, but we expect in coming weeks some indication that this can be accommodated.''

The planned Washington conference of former Iraqi military officers would complement this program. The purpose of the conference is not only to discuss military plans but also to try to attract support from current officers in the Iraqi armed forces.

Military training is not the only contentious issue. The Clinton administration was skeptical of the claims made by the Iraqi National Congress and opposed military training. Instead, it organized programs in emergency medical assistance and public relations. Clinton administration officials described these programs as a way to test whether the Iraqi National Congress could function as an effective political organization, but critics say they were merely efforts to appease conservative critics in Congress who wanted stronger action.

The Bush administration has continued these types of programs and the constraints that have gone with them. The administration, for example, is supporting a program by the Iraqi National Congress to beam radio broadcasts inside Iraqi to stir up opposition to Mr. Hussein.

But so far, the Bush administration has not authorized the opposition to install the radio transmitter in Iraq, which it considers too risky, insisting that it be based in Iran. Nor has the administration allowed the Iraqi opposition to gather evidence inside Iraq of human rights abuses by Mr. Hussein or produce or distribute newspapers in Iraq.

The State Department told the Iraqi National Congress in a memorandum on Nov. 8 that ''the Department of State is not prepared to fund I.N.C. activities inside Iraq at this time.''
