
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DESERT DMZ; U.N. Force at Kuwait Border Braces for Assault on Iraq
By Steven Lee Myers
March 11, 2003

The last international obstacle that stands between the United States and a war against Iraq is not just a vote on the Security Council but this barren stretch of scrub and desert patrolled by 1,300 soldiers and civilians, 11 of them Americans.

The zone -- gouged by deep trenches, scarred by sand berms and laced on either side with electrified fences -- was created after the Persian Gulf war 12 years ago as a buffer against any new Iraqi aggression toward Kuwait. Now the military observers working here under the blue United Nations flag are bracing themselves for an assault from the other side.

As American and British forces mass just south of here, the observers from the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission have reported repeated incursions into the zone. Most were by American helicopter and jet patrols and what appeared to be scouting missions by American marines in armored personnel carriers and civilian vehicles.

Five days ago a civilian contractor from South Africa cut seven holes in the fence on the Kuwaiti side -- two west and five east of the small border outpost at Abdaly.

When questioned, he told officials here that Kuwait's Interior Ministry had hired him to cut 35 holes by March 15, two days before a proposed deadline for Iraq to comply fully with United Nations resolutions barring its possession of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

The fence belongs to Kuwait, and so pocking it with holes does not technically violate the demilitarized zone, but with each gap wide enough for two American M1-A1 tanks side by side, the significance of it and the other incursions is obvious. ''We are not stupid,'' Maj. Sandor Galavics, an Austrian officer here, said today.

For the observers, sent here from 71 countries on what is essentially a peacekeeping mission, the seemingly inexorable buildup to war has heightened tensions, intensified their patrols and created a poignancy that their work has come to naught.

Like the allied forces in Kuwait, the soldiers and officers here have been vaccinated against anthrax and smallpox and have drawn up contingency plans. As Maj. Aleksandr Konkin of Russia put it, ''When the war starts, no one will warn us.''

With that war looming, the force here raised its alert status to red and on Saturday began evacuating the first 318 nonessential staff members, including civilians and some of the 775 members of the Bangladeshi battalion that provides security for the nearly 200 observers.

The demilitarized zone -- three miles deep in Kuwait and six miles deep in Iraq -- stretches 124 miles from the Saudi border to Iraq's only deep-water port at Umm Qasr and another 28 miles into the Khawr Abd Allah, an inlet of the Persian Gulf.

The zone is mostly flat and desolate, though several thousand Iraqis live within it, as do farmers and shepherds on the Kuwaiti side. The Iraqi side is still covered with land mines, as well as tank graveyards and other detritus of the last war.

Militarily the zone will be little more than a speed bump. One American Army officer said mammoth earthmovers already in place here would simply plow through the berms and fill the trenches to clear routes for advancing forces.

Diplomatically, though, it may be another matter.

If American-led ground forces punch through en masse on their way into Iraq, especially without approval of the United Nations Security Council, the United States and its allies could find themselves violating Security Council Resolution 687. The resolution created the observer mission in April 1991 with the mandate to deter incursions and ''observe any hostile actions mounted from the territory of one state into another.''

As they have for years, the observers reported the recent incursions to United Nations headquarters in New York, but there is little else they can do, creating what some described as a sense of futility.

The last report to the Security Council, covering March through September of last year, tallied 278 incursions. Most of those were American patrols of the no-flight zone over southern Iraq, which was never explicitly authorized by the United Nations. Most of the rest were by Iraqis crossing the border or entering the zone with weapons.

In recent weeks, officers here said, there have been no Iraqi incursions, but many American and British ones.

Continue reading the main story
''Most every day there is some violation,'' said Maj. Stephen Prosser, a British officer at Patrol and Observation Base N7, one of 17 in the zone.

Many of those are committed by American or British soldiers who have simply lost their way in the swirling desert and, Major Prosser said, happily turn around when confronted. Others are clearly there with a purpose. Unarmed, the observers do not try to stop them.

''We have no weapons, so for us the best weapon is our attitude,'' said Lt. Col. Gustavo Pérez Zoilo, an Argentine who serves as the mission's deputy commander for logistics.

''From a professional point of view it is an important job,'' he said today at Camp Khor, the mission's main base, only a few hundred yards from Iraq. ''Now the feeling for people is different. We know outside the DMZ there are also professionals preparing to do their job.''

The fate of the observers after a war remains unclear, but until ordered otherwise, they will remain.

''Our job,'' Colonel Pérez Zoilo said, ''will continue until the moment the tanks cross the border.''
