

A NATION AT WAR: DAMASCUS; Syrian Party Watches Iraq With Unease and Ponders Its Own Fate
By Neil MacFarquhar
March 30, 2003

The provincial Baath Party apparatchik, smoking a hookah in a downtown cafe, lowers his voice under the clack of the backgammon games around him and expresses the kind of criticism that still breeds fear of arrest.

''The party might be affected here,'' the middle-aged man said quietly when asked whether events in Iraq had any echo in Syria. ''If things improve for the Iraqis, people will demand reform here, but if things get worse there, of course they won't.''

In the Arab world, the American-led attack on Iraq generated near-universal condemnation, which grows more vociferous daily. Beyond the fighting, however, both governments and their populations wonder what will eventually emerge in postwar Iraq.

Perhaps nowhere do the questions about what comes next generate a sharper sense of dread than in neighboring Syria, controlled since 1963 by a rival branch of the same Baath Party that grips Iraq.

Syrian officials dismiss the notion of any possible effect of the war or any unease that their country might fall into United States sights next. But Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld made such a possibility explicit on Friday by saying Syria risked provoking American ire by allowing military equipment to flow into Iraq.

Syria denied the charge within hours -- unusual alacrity for an Arab government.

''The idea of de-Baathification and other such terms for the region is frightening for the regime,'' one Syrian professor said. ''But the idea that Baath rule would collapse or be washed away is heartening for the intelligentsia.''

When Bashar al-Assad, a 36-year-old Internet-savvy doctor, inherited the presidency from his father nearly three years ago, his inaugural address included a vision of a less officially controlled Syria, jettisoning the creaky socialist economy and allowing greater openness.

But in the ensuing years it has become clearer that he did not mean dismantling the one-party police state his father built. The president revised his remarks in a speech this month, castigating some for interpreting his call for tolerance as a sign of weakness.

Syria has proved remarkably resistant to change. For example, Mr. Assad issued a law in April 2001 allowing private banks. Not one has been able to cut through the bureaucratic thicket to go into business. Nine outspoken government critics have been silenced with jail terms of up to 10 years.


In the latest prominent case involving the press, Ibrahim Hamidi, the Damascus correspondent for Al Hayat, one of the Arab world's best newspapers, disappeared into jail in December, accused of breaking Syria's press law by quoting supposed presidential remarks in closed meetings and writing about possible changes in the army. His trial is expected to be secret.

Syrians undoubtedly hunger for a better life. Government officials say that it is coming and that replacing a system where essentially one man made every decision takes time, especially in the face of repeated regional crises.

''Any change, any reform, is connected to the regional situation,'' said Saadalla Agha al-Kalaa, the minister of tourism and one of the staunchest reformers brought into the cabinet by Mr. Assad. ''I don't think the will for change will increase; the will needed is there.''

The Iraq war could prove an especially harsh economic blow. Western governments said Syria received about 200,000 barrels of discounted oil daily from Iraq, shipments the government always denied receiving because they violated United Nations sanctions.

That alone was worth some $1.5 billion annually in government savings, and Syria last year sold $2 billion in goods to Iraq, many of which it would be hard pressed to sell elsewhere. Thousands of Iraqi government employees were on prewar waiting lists for rickety Syrian kerosene heaters, for example, because they had no choice. The 100 trucks a day that left Syria at Al Tanef crossing alone have dwindled to none.

It is the lack of any improvement in their lives, unlikely to improve with the war, that really grates.

''Our standard of living has not changed at all,'' complained the provincial Baath Party man. He blames corruption for much of it, telling how his local elementary school principal was fired because the man refused to demand bribes from the students that local party hacks pocketed.

Continue reading the main story
Baath Party officials at all levels admit that rampant corruption and bureaucratic resistance is retarding reform. Even the most senior officials concede that a transformed Iraq might lessen the resistance to change. Some Syrians speculate, however, that it might make the security services more repressive.

''The regime in Syria fears this war in Iraq because it might affect things here,'' said Haitham Maleh, a lawyer and human rights activist jailed for seven years as a political prisoner and now facing renewed charges of defaming the government. ''They don't feel secure.''

Yet like all Syrians interviewed, he adamantly rejects any American role: ''We hate the regime here because they are a dictatorship, but we don't agree with any power coming in from outside to change it.''

Syrians are convinced that the United States went to war in no small part because Israel found Iraq a threat. Seeing the way the Iraqis are fighting back, Syrian officials profess confidence that the United States will be preoccupied for far too long to worry about Iraq's neighbors.

''Let's wait and see how long they will be in Iraq,'' said Buthaina Shaaban, the spokeswoman for the Syrian Foreign Ministry. ''I think they will be in Iraq for a very long time.''
