

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT; Bush Tells Critics Hussein Could Strike at Any Time
By David E. Sanger
Oct. 6, 2002

President Bush today offered a new argument for acting quickly against Iraq, saying that Saddam Hussein ''has a horrible history'' of striking without warning. Mr. Bush emphasized that should military force be required to oust Mr. Hussein, the United States would ''help the Iraqi people rebuild and form a just government.''

Speaking at a rally here in New Hampshire, where he was making a political swing to bolster the Senate run of Representative John E. Sununu, Mr. Bush stepped up his personal indictment of Mr. Hussein and made an impassioned argument for pre-emptive action. ''We cannot ignore history,'' Mr. Bush said in the armory in downtown Manchester. ''We must not ignore reality. We must do everything we can to disarm this man before he hurts one single American.''

In Boston on Friday, Mr. Bush for the first time in public described the Iraqi leader as a ''cold-blooded killer'' -- a phrase he normally reserves for Al Qaeda. His comments over the past two days seemed an effort to answer critics who argue that the threat posed by Iraq is not imminent enough to require a pre-emptive strike at this time.

On Monday night, Mr. Bush has scheduled an address to the nation on the Iraqi threat, and he was clearly toning his arguments today for that event.

His comments today about rebuilding Iraq after an attack came in his weekly radio address. It was the first time that Mr. Bush himself has so expressly looked beyond a military conflict and toward what many experts warn will be the far more difficult task: Holding a fractious country together.

He used his radio address to argue that ''should force be required to bring Saddam to account, the United States will work with other nations to help the Iraqi people rebuild and form a just government.''

He added: ''We have no quarrel with the Iraqi people. They are the daily victims of Saddam Hussein's oppression, and they will be the first to benefit when the world's demands are met.''

Mr. Bush's main task today was a political one, as he fought to gain back control of the Senate, which the Democrats now hold by one seat. Mr. Bush's hopes may hinge on whether Mr. Sununu, the son of the chief of staff of Mr. Bush's father, can win the seat held by Senator Robert C. Smith.

The Senate campaign between Mr. Sununu and Gov. Jeanne Shaheen has turned nasty. Governor Shaheen's supporters are protesting a television advertisement that claims she has failed to protect abused and neglected children. There are conflicting polls on the question of who is in the lead.

Continue reading the main story
But at the same time Mr. Bush was tailoring his remarks to influence the debate in the Senate over a resolution authorizing him to use force against Mr. Hussein, a debate Mr. Bush said today that he welcomes. The speech on Monday, Mr. Bush's aides said, is intended to build public pressure on the Senate to act quickly on the resolution Mr. Bush has worked out with House leaders.

Today the Senate Majority Leader, Tom Daschle, who has resisted pressure to sign on to wording that Mr. Bush worked out with the House, said he still had reservations.

''The wording of the resolution today is, clearly, better than it was when it started,'' Mr. Daschle said in an interview on CNN. ''It's moved in the direction we wanted it to. Can we clarify it? Can we improve on it some more? I think so.''

He said that Iraq's capability and intentions were far less clear than Mr. Bush suggests. ''I don't think there is any consensus with regard to the threat, today,'' he said.

He also spoke about what would follow a war, saying that there are many unresolved questions: ''How long will we be there? What will it entail, on the part of the United States? How much will it cost? Who will be involved? What kind of a framework can be established with Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds? Those are the kinds of things, I think, that have yet to be addressed satisfactorily, and it's why many of us continue to ask questions.''

Some allies and Iraq's Arab neighbors today stepped up their criticism of Mr. Bush's pressure to confront Mr. Hussein, and to confront him quickly. President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, who has openly split with Mr. Bush over the strategy, warned in an interview published in Cairo that the United States has not thought through the consequences of an attack that would remove Mr. Hussein from office. He said that such a move could lead to civil war ''because of the ethnic and religious diversity of this country.'' The result, he said, could be a ''partition of Iraq.''

Russia, which hinted earlier this week that it might be open to a new United Nations resolution on inspections of Iraq, which Mr. Bush had demanded, seemed to veer in the other direction today. ''From a legal point of view, no new U.N. Security Council resolution is required for the return of inspectors,'' said Russia's foreign minister, Igor Ivanov.

On the Greek island of Crete, Javier Solana, the foreign policy chief for the European Union sidestepped questions today about whether the United States or its allies would use force. But he noted one difference with Mr. Bush: ''Our objective is not regime change,'' he said.
