

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE ALLIES; A Vulnerable Kuwait Readies Its Defenses For a U.S. Attack on Iraq and the Reaction
By Craig S. Smith
Oct. 20, 2002

Air-raid sirens wailed here early one morning this week, signaling to Kuwaitis that it is time to start worrying again about the mercurial leader 360 miles to the north.

The sirens, sounded as a test, are part of an early warning system meant to alert Kuwait's 800,000 citizens and 1.2 million foreign residents that missiles are on the way.

The prospect of a United States attack on Iraq raises concerns that President Saddam Hussein might wreak vengeance on his neighbors with a salvo of chemical or biological weapons. Kuwaitis feel particularly vulnerable because any American invasion will probably be launched largely from their soil.

They know well what to do if the sirens wail for real: seal themselves in airtight rooms that they are being instructed to prepare in their homes and listen to radios or televisions for word on whether chemical or biological agents have been detected. If so, they are to sit tight and wait for the Civil Defense Force to come and, if all goes well, evacuate them safely.

But the results of a chemical attack in this desert land are likely to be far messier than the plan suggests. When asked what people caught in the open could do to protect themselves, the defense force's First Lt. Barrak al-Qallaf, who holds a master's degree in chemical warfare agents, answered with nervous laughter. ''You're asking a difficult question,'' he said.

Iraq is believed to have stockpiles of nerve gas and mustard gas, not to mention anthrax and perhaps smallpox, as well as a small arsenal of Scud missiles that could reach Kuwait in minutes. Depending on the payload and the chemicals involved, one missile could produce a gas cloud 200 to 800 yards wide.

The government plans to import enough gas masks for every man, woman and child in the country, but nerve gas and mustard gas can both kill when absorbed by the skin.

It could take as long as a day for the deadly suspended droplets from a chemical attack to settle or disperse. Even then, blistering agents, like mustard gas, adhere to surfaces and could be kicked up again by windblown sand.

Evacuation sounds comforting, but the reality of finding and safely removing people from airtight rooms before they expend their clean oxygen supply is trickier than it sounds. Lieutenant Qallaf said people should not allow more than one person for every square yard of floor space in any sealed room. Even so, the room's oxygen would probably last only about five hours.

Many embassies and a few wealthy Kuwaitis have bought special Finnish tents with air compressors and superfine filters designed to protect up to 10 people from radiation, poison gas or biological agents for as long as 500 hours.

Arif Masood, the sales manager at Boodai Trading Company, which sells the tents, said his company had sold 30 for about $13,000 each but was out of stock and had a growing list of back orders.

None of Mr. Masood's customers want to be identified. ''They're afraid that if people know they have this tent they will be inundated by neighbors if there ever is an attack,'' he said.

Boodai Trading has also installed nuclear-biological-chemical filtration systems in more than 50 permanent shelters, but those will not help the average Kuwaiti. The largest of the permanent gas-protected shelters is reserved for the ruling Sabah family with enough beds and food for nearly 300 people to endure a long stay. Most other protected shelters are for the Ministry of Defense.

Some people say they will not take chances and are already preparing to leave. Ahmed Mousa, a Somalian taxi driver who has been working in Kuwait for more than 10 years, said he planned to go to Syria next month to wait out what many are beginning to see as an inevitable war.

But most Kuwaitis remain doubters.

''It is like the boy who cried wolf,'' said a doctor swathed in the Persian Gulf's traditional white robe and headdress over tea at a government minister's home this week. ''We have heard these warnings so many times before that no one is frightened any more.''

Mr. Hussein has used chemical weapons before, first in the eight-year war against Iran, and then against Kurds in northern Iraq. An estimated 5,000 people died in Halabjah in the worst attack in 1988.

Continue reading the main story
Kuwait, of course, is not the only potential target of Mr. Hussein's wrath. During the 1991 Persian Gulf war, he fired missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia. None contained chemical or biological weapons.

But the United States' Camp Doha military base here, which is expected to play an important role in any American-led invasion, makes Kuwait a likelier target this time. American marines have been training for ground warfare here, including house-to-house urban combat.

Most people here believe that even if Mr. Hussein is planning a retaliatory attack on Kuwait, American airstrikes will pre-empt him by destroying whatever missiles he has at the outset of any war. If any missiles survive and are launched at Kuwait, Kuwaitis are hoping that recently delivered Patriot missiles will knock them out before they can land.

If any missiles do land, many Kuwaitis say they are prepared to face the consequences.

''I won't wear any of these,'' said Ali Husain Makki al-Juma, holding one of the Korean gas masks that his company imports. ''Our life is in God's hands.''
