

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN FRONT; Turkish Military Backs Role in U.S. Drive on Iraq
By Dexter Filkins
March 6, 2003

Turkey's military stepped into the political battle over the country's role in a conflict with Iraq today, signaling its support for a measure that would allow thousands of American troops to launch an attack from Turkish soil.

In a rare public statement, Gen. Hilmi Ozkok, the chief of the Turkish general staff, appeared to back efforts by the country's political leaders to ask Parliament to reconsider a resolution that would allow as many 62,000 American troops to attack from bases here. The measure was voted down by Parliament on Saturday.

''The Turkish armed forces' view is the same as the government's and is reflected in the motion that our government sent to Parliament,'' General Ozkok told reporters. ''The war will be short if a second front is opened from the north.''

Only hours before General Ozkok's remarks, a senior member in the ruling Justice and Development Party said that Turkey's leaders were determined to take the measure back to the Parliament and push harder to guarantee its success. The official said the government probably would not act until after elections Sunday that are expected to lead to Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the party leader, becoming prime minister.

Today's events appeared to set the stage for a political struggle in which Turkish political and military leadership would push the Parliament against public opinion.

The measure authorizing American troops had been endorsed by both Mr. Erdogan and the current prime minister, Abdullah Gul, and both men had predicted its passage. But nearly 100 members of the ruling party defied their leaders and voted against it. The measure failed by three votes.

Many of those who voted against the resolution cited the opinions of Turkey's voters, who polls show oppose their country's involvement in a war by an overwhelming margin.

Turkish officials and commentators said it was unlikely that the Turkish military was trying to force the government to reconsider the motion, but rather that it was trying to provide political cover for them so they could push the Parliament against public opinion.

''It's a good statement,'' Mr. Gul said of the general's remarks.

Turkish officials close to Mr. Gul and Mr. Erdogan said neither man approves of America's plans for Iraq, but that both have concluded that they cannot afford to spurn Turkey's most important ally or the $6 billion in direct aid the United States has offered.

Turkey's leaders have been under intense American pressure to ask the Parliament to reconsider the measure. On Sunday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell telephoned Mr. Gul to talk about the issue.

American diplomats here have been busy pressing their case, meeting privately with members of the majority party, including legislators who voted against the measure.

Emin Sirin, a legislator in the governing party who opposed the American plan, said American diplomats asked him what they could do to improve relations between the two countries, but he said he had not been asked to change his vote.

''They had a very gentlemanly attitude,'' Mr. Sirin said. ''They didn't have that attitude a month ago.''

Mr. Sirin said he had not decided to change his vote, but might if the United States government offered a more generous economic package.

There were indications that others who had opposed the measure would be willing to change their minds, if only to prop up a government that had seen its credibility badly damaged by Saturday's defeat.

In an interview in Sabah, a daily newspaper, one influential member of Parliament who had opposed the measure suggested many of the 96 legislators who opposed the resolution last week would change their minds.


''If the same motion comes today, it would 100 percent be accepted,'' said Mehmet Elkatmis, a member of the ruling party who voted against the deployment.

It was unclear what motivated the Turkish generals to intervene in the debate over American troops. The military had assumed a low profile in the days leading up the vote, refusing to offer an opinion on the question of American troops. Some Turkish officials said the hands-off approach was due primarily to the generals' dislike of the ruling party, which they regard with suspicion for its Islamist past.

The Turkish military has had an extensive role in domestic politics, having deposed civilian governments in several times in the last four decades. In 1997, it orchestrated the removal of an Islamic-minded government; many members of that body are now in the present government.

A Turkish official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said the generals were particularly alarmed that Saturday's vote, by canceling the deployment of Turkey's troops into northern Iraq, had effectively forfeited Turkey's role over the future of northern Iraq.

Turkey's leaders are worried that the Kurdish region in northern Iraq could become an independent state. That, they fear, could rekindle desires for independence among the Kurds in Turkey.

The Turkish official said that Turkey's generals were skeptical of the ability of the United States to ensure that the Iraqi Kurds did not try to break away if the Saddam Hussein were deposed.

In his remarks, General Ozkok alluded to those concerns, and sent a terse warning to the Kurds of northern Iraq.

''I remind them of our legitimate right to defend our national interests, and I hope they will be prudent and cooperative,'' General Ozkok said. ''Those who want to replace peace with confrontation will also take the responsibility and bear the consequences.''
