

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SURVEILLANCE; U.N. Inspectors Report Some Progress in Talks With Iraqis
By Mark Landler
Oct. 1, 2002

United Nations weapons inspectors used their first meeting with Iraqi officials in almost four years to press today for unfettered access to sensitive sites like the Defense Ministry and the headquarters of Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard.

United Nations officials reported modest progress from today's talks at the International Atomic Energy Agency, which will continue on Tuesday. The session did not confront the issue of Mr. Hussein's presidential palaces, which have been virtually off limits to inspectors in the past and which the United States and Britain want opened to scrutiny.

''We aim to restore as much 'any time, any place, unfettered access' as possible,'' said Mohamed ElBaradei, the Egyptian who is director general of the atomic agency, one of two United Nations' bodies responsible for monitoring Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.

''They're being very positive and businesslike, and they are coming with a desire to reach an agreement,'' Mr. ElBaradei said of the Iraqis.

In what he described as a positive development, Iraq lived up to its obligation and agreed to supply details on changes it made in plants and equipment with dual civilian and military uses. It is the first such progress report since United Nations inspectors left Iraq in late 1998 before American and British bombing raids.

The United States is pushing the United Nations Security Council to approve a resolution setting stringent new rules and deadlines for the inspections and authorizing it to use ''all necessary means'' -- including military force -- against Mr. Hussein if Iraq does not comply.

On Sept. 16, Iraq invited the inspectors back, and United Nations officials said today that they could be in the country by the third week of October. But over the weekend, Iraq said it would not abide by a new resolution.

''We did not discuss the implications of a new resolution on the Iraqis' decision to allow the inspectors back,'' Mr. ElBaradei said.

Today's meeting, he said, was intended to resolve logistical issues, like landing rights, security, visas, customs clearance, accommodations and communications so the inspectors could resume their work. These details, while important to the program, are generally not as contentious.

''We'd like to insure that if and when inspections come about, we will not have clashes inside'' Iraq, said Hans Blix, the executive chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, which focuses on chemical and biological weapons.

Mr. Blix, who has long experience with Iraq as a former head of the energy agency here, declined to comment on the talks until after they end Tuesday. The Iraqi delegation, led by Amir al-Sadi, a special adviser to Mr. Hussein, left the building by a side entrance to avoid reporters.

In 1998, Iraq and the United Nations agreed to restrict access to eight palaces belonging to Mr. Hussein. Amid widespread suspicion that Iraq uses these complexes to hide plans for its nuclear, chemical and biological arms programs, the United States has demanded that they be opened.

A senior diplomat who attended today's meeting noted that the palaces were protected in an agreement between Iraq and the United Nations. ''We both recognized that this wasn't the place to discuss them,'' he said.

Also unresolved is whether the inspectors will be able to operate in the no-flight zones in northern and southern Iraq. Because Iraq does not control this airspace, it says it cannot provide adequate security.

Experts on the inspection process said Iraq had in the past forced inspectors to fly to distant, inconvenient airports. Their hotel rooms were broken into, sometimes while they were sleeping in them. They were transported in dilapidated buses. On a few occasions, the experts said, people even dumped plates of food into the visitors' laps at dinner.

''Even if you're only talking about logistics, the Iraqis can put up hurdles that make the inspectors' lives very difficult,'' said Gary Milholland, the director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, a Washington-based research and advocacy organization.

Mr. Blix's group has gathered 220 experts from 45 countries, and plans to put 80 people at a time in Baghdad. They will monitor chemical and biological weapons, and ballistic missiles with a range of more than 150 kilometers.

The Atomic Energy Agency, which monitors Iraq's nuclear weapons program, would field a much smaller team. It said it successfully dismantled Mr. Hussein's nuclear weapons program by late 1998, though officials cannot say whether he revived it during the last four years.

Although the United Nations destroyed nearly 700 tons of chemical weapons agents in the past, Iraq is believed to possess a stockpile of munitions and the ability to produce mustard gas and nerve agents. Experts believe Mr. Hussein also has biological agents that could be used to manufacture anthrax.

Officials at the atomic energy agency said it would probably take a year from any return to Iraq to determine whether the country is free of nuclear weapons. Other United Nations officials have given the same timetable for ridding Iraq of chemical and biological weapons.

The current push by the United States and Britain to get France, Russia and China, the three other veto-bearing permanent members of the Security Council, to accept a new resolution governing inspections seemed to lend a tone of uncertainty to conversations here today.

''I think we're planning to go,'' one senior diplomat said, ''unless the Security Council tells us not to go.''
