

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; Iraqi General Praises U.N. Arms Teams
By John F. Burns
Dec. 13, 2002

The general named by Iraq to work with United Nations weapons inspectors today praised their ''professionalism'' in the first two weeks of surprise searches across Iraq. If the inspectors continue to resist what he characterized as American and British pressure, the general said, it ''will be hard to be pessimistic'' about the chances of concluding the inspections and avoiding war.

The remarks by Maj. Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, head of Iraq's National Monitoring Directorate, appeared to reflect some confidence that the inspections would run their course without any startling discoveries of banned weapons programs.

He spoke before American intelligence officials told The New York Times in Washington that an initial review of Iraq's 12,000-page declaration to the United Nations last weekend had shown obvious omissions.

The United States and Britain have charged that Iraq continued to pursue weapons of mass destruction. The Iraqis have strongly denied this.

The general's comments indicated that the Iraqis may try to maintain a defiant campaign against the governments in Washington and London, relying on the United Nations weapons inspectors finding nothing to back up the American and British allegations.

''We appreciate the professionalism with which the inspections are undertaken,'' General Amin said. He said the United Nations teams had ''shown respect for our traditions and values,'' suspending work for two days last week during the Muslim holiday of Id al-Fitr, and had avoided the ''silly questions'' posed by earlier teams of weapons inspectors in the 1990's.

Today, the inspectors fanned out again on searches that General Amin said had reached 58 of 900 ''declared'' inspection sites across Iraq, meaning sites both Iraq and the inspectors agree will have to be checked.

Six new sites were inspected today, including a plant in a Baghdad suburb said to have been manufacturing Iraq's banned Hussein ballistic missile in the 1990's, and the Hateen missile launch site in the desert 125 miles west of Baghdad, where inspectors watched a short-range ballistic missile of a type not denied to Iraq being test-fired.

The inspectors also went to an antibiotics factory, an electronics factory, another missile plant on a site that previously housed buildings engaged in nuclear weapons work, and a former uranium enrichment plant, all in or near Baghdad. Two sites, the Ibn Sina uranium enrichment plant, formerly known as Tarmiya, 25 miles north of Baghdad, and the Nidaa missile plant in the Baghdad suburb of Zafaraniyah, were destroyed by American bombing during the 1990's.

In a further indication that Baghdad sought to maintain cordial ties with the United Nations, officials in New York announced today that Iraq had extended an invitation to a top United Nations official in charge of resolving remaining differences between Iraq and Kuwait after the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

Yuli M. Vorontsov is the coordinator for efforts to find Kuwaitis who disappeared during the war and secure the return of Kuwaiti property Baghdad seized in its invasion. He has never been allowed to visit Iraq before.

The relaxed posture struck by General Amin was broken, briefly, when he was asked about a report in today's editions of The Washington Post. It quoted unnamed American officials as saying that the Bush administration had received ''credible reports'' that Islamic extremists linked to Al Qaeda had received chemical weapons, possibly deadly VX nerve gas, from Iraq.

General Amin called the report ''ridiculous.'' He said Iraq had ended all its chemical weapons programs and destroyed all of its stockpiles of chemical weapons, agents and ''precursors,'' meaning materials used in the production of the weapons, under United Nations supervision between 1992 and 1994.

This claim appeared to conflict with reports by United Nations inspectors in the mid-to-late 1990's, which claimed that some chemical weapons activities continued covertly well into the decade, and that large stocks of VX gas produced by Iraq remained unaccounted for when the old inspection teams withdrew for the last time in late 1998.

''We used to hear such reports from the enemies of Iraq and from the intelligence services of the United States of America and the Mossad, from Israel, to show the Iraqi government and Iraq as not implementing the resolutions of the United Nations and opposing the will of the international community, and this is absolutely incorrect,'' General Amin said.

The insistence that Iraq had no chemical weapons programs after 1994, and no stockpiles of weapons or materials, conformed to the unyielding position Iraq adopted in last weekend's declaration.

Another Iraqi general, Amir al-Saadi, told a news conference on Sunday that the declaration had avowed that Iraq had ended all its work on nuclear and biological weapons, and destroyed its stockpiles of materials, before United Nations inspectors arrived for the first time in 1991, and that there had been no new work in any of the banned fields after the weapons inspectors pulled out in 1998.

The leaders of the weapons inspection teams in Baghdad have said that they expect the effort to become more tense when the inspectors, using the Iraqi declaration as a baseline, start visiting sites the Iraqis may not know the inspection teams have on their checklist.

Another watershed will come when Iraq delivers a list of all scientists, engineers and officials who have worked since 1998 in fields related to the banned weapons, as required by the tough new inspections mandate passed by the Security Council last month.
