

A NATION AT WAR: SECOND FRONT; Allied Troops Are Flown In To Airfields In North Iraq
By C. J. Chivers
March 24, 2003

American military transport planes landed in northern Iraq on Saturday night and early Sunday, ferrying military equipment and allied troops into the Kurdish-controlled zone.

Their arrival opened a new phase in the war against Saddam Hussein's government and Ansar al-Islam, a militant Islamic group operating near the Iranian border. The landings occurred as air strikes continued at the Iraqi cities of Mosul and Kirkuk, and as thousands of Kurdish irregulars were massing in this village, arriving in buses and trucks with their rifles and bedrolls.

They appeared to be readying for a large battle in nearby mountains.

Kurdish officials said a ground assault with Kurdish and American forces cooperating against Ansar was now imminent, and that more planeloads of American soldiers would soon be arriving to fight against Mr. Hussein's forces to the west and south. There was no immediate confirmation of this from American officials.

Since last fall, intelligence and Special Forces teams have been working with local Kurdish forces. In recent weeks they had been joined by forward air controllers, who have been helping to direct allied air power against the Iraqi Army and Ansar.

But this weekend, the transport planes brought the first significant numbers of allied ground combat troops to northern Iraq, which broke from Mr. Hussein's rule in 1991.

Senior Kurdish officials said at least two planes carrying 200 American soldiers arrived at a former Iraqi air strip at Bakrajo, near Sulaimaniya, capital of the eastern portion of the Kurdish enclave. The planes also carried helicopters and ammunition, the officials said.

An undetermined number of transport planes also landed at Harir, an airfield near Erbil, senior officials said.

Kurdish officials declined to disclose what planes landing there carried, but there were hints today, including a sighting of American soldiers shopping in Salahuddin, the home base of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which rules the western half of the Kurdish enclave. The Harir air strip is nearby.

The Americans, two from the Air Force and two from the Army, were dressed in clean uniforms that clearly identified them. They bought large amounts of trash bags, soap, liquid cleaner and toilet paper.

Kurdish officials, speaking on condition that they not be identified, said the newly arrived troops were advance elements of a force that would soon open a northern front against Iraqi forces.

The allied forces on the northern front would be smaller and more lightly armed than armored columns the Pentagon wanted to bring in from Turkey, before negotiations with the Turkish government stalled. But officials said its American component would probably reach several thousand troops.

One official said he expected the contingent to grow steadily.

The deployment of American troops was immediately apparent.

By late morning soldiers were being moved in convoys across the region. One convoy was seen on the road to Erbil, and another, consisting of three buses and three cargo trucks, drove from Sulaimaniya toward this village.

The soldiers, grim-faced and carrying M-4 carbines, stared straight ahead, fingers on the trigger-guards as they moved toward the front with Ansar al-Islam. Their number was impossible to determine precisely. There appeared to be at least 75 to 100 troops in all.

They arrived to an ongoing battle. Positions occupied by Ansar and Komali Islami Kurdistan, another Islamic group, were bombarded by American aircraft early on Saturday and at about 4:30 a.m. today.

The surrounding area has been chaotic ever since, with fleeing civilians crowding roads in vehicles packed with children, clothing and food. But one sedan carried a suicide bomb, which killed several Kurds and an Australian journalist on Saturday at a checkpoint near here.

Kurdish officials reported that American jets attacked a frontline Iraqi position in the village of Faidah, north of Mosul, at 8 a.m. West of Mosul, Iraqi troops fired two mortar shells at the Kurdish-controlled village of Kalak. One landed harmlessly in the Upper Zab River. The other exploded in a field.

Tonight, midway between Kirkuk and Mosul, Iraqi forces fired 10 mortar rounds into Kurdish-controlled territory, Kurdish officials said. Tracer fire and flashes were also seen from Chamchamal, a Kurdish town just a 20-minute drive from Kirkuk.

Here in Halabja, Fakradin Abdullah Hama Said, the chief of military intelligence, said six missiles struck Ansar position in the morning.

He said damage estimates were not yet complete, but Kurds had intercepted Ansar communications indicating 30 Ansar guerrillas were killed at a camp at the mountain village of Sarget in the first attacks.

The camp was identified by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in February as a terrorist training school and poison factory.

Kurds also said they learned this afternoon, from other intercepted messages, that a large number of Ansar guerrillas had gathered near a mosque in the village of Glup.

Two Kurdish 122-millimeter guns began firing on the village at about 3:30 p.m. Almost simultaneously, Ansar's own batteries fired on the Kurds, shelling the small garrison of Tepe Kurrah, atop a knoll in the valley.

The Ansar barrage, apparently from heavy mortars, was surprisingly precise. For a few minutes the Kurdish position was peppered with explosions, and the network of bunkers were obscured by smoke.

It was not clear what effect, if any, the barrages had. But Kurds said the heaviest fighting against Ansar forces was soon to come, when the American soldiers and the Kurdish irregular troops begin what officials here hope will be a final attack.
