

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INNER CIRCLE; Iraqi Disputes Charge by Bush That Baghdad Has Qaeda Ties
By John F. Burns
Oct. 20, 2002

An Iraqi official who is part of President Saddam Hussein's inner circle has said the government has had no links with Al Qaeda or Osama bin Laden, denying a charge made by President Bush.

''We have no connection with Al Qaeda or Osama bin Laden,'' Tariq Aziz, a deputy prime minister, said in an interview on Friday night with Italian state television. ''It's clear, you see, our national and political system is different; we are a socialist party, we don't condone religious fundamentalism, and therefore we don't have any relationship with those people. It is a matter between them and the United States of America.''

Mr. Aziz was responding to allegations made by President Bush in a speech 12 days ago setting out the reasons for American threats of military action against Iraq. Mr. Bush said then that the United States knew of contacts between Iraq and ''the Al Qaeda terrorist network'' that went back a decade, and that Iraq had trained Al Qaeda members in making bombs, poisons and deadly gases.

Mr. Bush also said that some senior Al Qaeda leaders fled to Iraq from Afghanistan, and that they included ''one very senior Al Qaeda leader'' who received medical treatment in Baghdad this year and who has been associated with planning chemical and biological attacks. Mr. Aziz was not asked to respond to any of these specific allegations, and he offered no denial of them.

In the hourlong interview, a transcript of which became available today, Mr. Aziz offered one of the fullest accounts of the Iraqi leadership's thinking by any senior official in the months since American pressures on Baghdad began to mount. Because Mr. Aziz is a member of the eight-man Revolutionary Command Council that forms the inner circle of power in Baghdad, his views are regarded as a close reflection of the attitudes of Mr. Hussein.

At one point in the interview, Mr. Aziz appeared to suggest that Iraq was preparing for the possibility that Israel would join the United States in a war against Iraq. But his remarks on the subject could be interpreted as a reassurance to Israel that the Baghdad government has no plans to fire missiles at Israel or any other nearby country, as it did with Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

''We are a courageous country and we can defend ourselves, but we are not going to fight beyond our national territory,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''We are going to fight inside Iraq to protect Iraq from the aggression, and we are not going to fight outside Iraq. So if anybody comes to attack us, whether it is the United States or Britain or Israel, we are going to fight against them to protect our nation.''

Mr. Aziz said Iraq was awaiting the outcome of negotiations between the United States and other United Nations Security Council members on a new resolution setting the mandate for United Nations weapons inspectors, and would not comment on any possible toughening of the mandate until it saw a draft.

But he said Iraq was willing to consider changes to earlier resolutions that governed the inspectors' search for biological, chemical and nuclear weapons from 1991 to 1998, including any new provisions for searching Mr. Hussein's presidential palaces.

''You should remember that the inspectors entered all the presidential sites in 1998, and at that time Bill Clinton and Tony Blair were telling international public opinion that those presidential sites were filled with weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''When the inspectors entered them they didn't find anything, and it was clear that all those accusations were false.''

He added, ''So now they are making similar accusations, and the inspectors will find that they are also as false as they were in 1998. Anyhow, if they have new ideas, we are ready, we are open-minded to discuss it with them openly.''

Mr. Aziz made no mention of the confrontation that developed over the palace inspections in 1998, when Iraq's interpretation of conditions agreed to by the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, led to delays and other obstacles in obtaining access to the palaces. Faced with these and other frustrations, the weapons inspectors withdrew, leading to intensive bombing of Iraq by the United States and Britain. Since then, there have been no inspections.

Mr. Aziz, speaking in English, implied that President Bush's demand for a new round of weapons inspections, under more stringent conditions, was a pretext to prepare the path for America to invade Iraq and topple Mr. Hussein.

''No, no, absolutely, we don't have any weapons of mass destruction,'' he said.

He contended that the real American purpose was to serve the interests of Israel, by weakening Iraq, and to take control of Iraq's oil fields.

Mr. Aziz said that the referendum this week on Mr. Hussein's leadership, in which the president was declared to have won 100 per cent of the vote, reflected the determination of Iraq's 22 million people to stand up to the United States.''

''In every Iraqi house there are weapons, rifles and other conventional weapons, and they are ready to fight from house to house, from street to street,'' he said, ''and if the Americans come to Iraq they will be faced with great resistance and they will suffer great losses.''
