

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PERSIAN GULF POLITICS; Kuwaiti Political Combatants Hold Breath for Iraq Outcome
By Clifford Krauss
Jan. 5, 2003

The ruins from the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in 1990 and the subsequent Persian Gulf war have long been bulldozed into memories in this land of marble shopping malls and futuristic beltways full of Mercedes-Benzes, where a beach-side construction boom gives the appearance of an Arabian Riviera in the making.

But the political fallout from the war could hardly have been foreseen by the first Bush administration when it led the military coalition that threw Iraq's troops out of this tiny gulf emirate.

Kuwait has become a more democratic place, in keeping with Washington's urgings. But it has been the Islamists who have used the political opening to outmaneuver liberals and make the most gains, pushing an agenda of segregating women in public places and making Islamic tradition the cornerstone of the law.

Now, with a second President Bush threatening to invade Iraq -- this time with troops based in Kuwait -- liberals and Islamists alike see a new chance to refashion Kuwait. But much depends on the outcome of any war next door and on what kind of Iraq emerges.

''Any secular or liberal regime in Iraq that shows it can produce food for the people would weaken the conservatives'' in Kuwait, said Abdullah Nibari, a liberal in the National Assembly. ''But if the results are negative, this will vindicate the attitude of Islamists and those opposed to any kind of foreign influence.''

The most extreme Islamists here oppose an American invasion of Iraq. A small core has apparently joined Al Qaeda's terrorist cause, staging an attack on American soldiers here two months ago. But they are in a minority.

More mainstream Islamists, who constitute the most influential bloc in the National Assembly, say they welcome an American effort to force a change of leadership in Iraq as long as Washington does not occupy the country and try to remake the region in its image.

''If the American objective is to liberate the Iraqi people from the criminal regime of Saddam Hussein to put Iraq on the course of peace and justice, this is a noble objective which will benefit Kuwait a great deal,'' said Khalid al-Sultan, a leader of the Salafi movement, one of the more conservative Islamic groups participating openly in politics here.

The battle between Islamists and Western-oriented liberals is a constant element of political life in this diverse society, which includes desert Bedouins, devout Shiites and a large, urban and mostly Sunni elite with a taste for luxurious mansions and European vacations.

The American-led liberation of Kuwait in 1991 ushered in a new democratic age here. The emir, Sheik Jaber al-Ahmed al-Sabah, and Crown Prince Saad al-Abdullah al-Sabah cast their lot with the West and allowed the reopening of a popularly elected National Assembly that had been shut down three times since its founding in 1961. Traditional Kuwaiti political roles became jumbled. Suddenly, the liberals who had been pressing the ruling family for reform became an informal ally, while the traditionally allied conservatives became a stubborn opposition.

The underground movement that had formed to resist the Iraqi occupiers created a new unity among Bedouins, Shiites and Sunnis. They used that unity to create the largest bloc of votes in the new legislature, pushing a socially conservative agenda.

This legislative coalition has opposed the emir's will on a number of issues. It has succeeded in denying women the right to vote, segregating male and female students, banning public dancing, and stalling government plans to expand the role of international oil companies in modernizing Kuwait's oil production.

Should the Islamist coalition extend its power in elections next year, allied activists say they will push for a tax on the rich to redistribute wealth to the poor and for a constitutional amendment making Shariah, the traditional Islamic law, ''the source of legislation.''

Liberals fear that Islamists will use the democratic process to install harsh Islamic penal and social codes and to further segregate the sexes in the workplace.

''The future long term will be determined by the need for development and trade,'' said Shafeeq Ghabra, director of the Center for Strategic and Future Studies at Kuwait University, ''or we can choose to go in the direction of failed states and experiences that have failed for centuries.''

The liberals hope that a democratic Iraq will re-emerge as a liberalizing influence over Kuwait, as it was when a reformist government was in place there in the 1930's, and restart traditionally robust trade relations.

Business leaders and other elites appear to be betting on the liberals, and they are eager to reopen trade with Iraq. The Kuwaiti stock market reached a five-year high last week, and banks are reporting an increase in deposits.

The public mood appears to be as ambiguous as the political currents, a mix of fear of terrorist or Iraqi attacks and giddiness over the possibility that the menacing shadow that Mr. Hussein has cast for the past 12 years might finally be lifted.

''Once we are rid of Saddam Hussein, we'll make friends with the Iraqis, and then we will have no problems,'' said Salem al-Anazi, 38, a businessman drinking tea with a friend in the crowded Friday market as he watched shoppers go by. ''The difference will be between sleeping when you feel a threat in your midst and sleeping with no threat at all.''
