

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq's Two Faces of War: Armed, Ready, Yet in a Mood to Disarm
By Neil MacFarquhar
March 6, 2003

The split nature of Iraqi policy in the face of a war that seems to loom ever closer was evident today with the government crushing nine missiles under United Nations supervision at the same time that several thousand paramilitary troops staged the capital's biggest display of armed force in recent memory.

''These are the most important days in the history of our country,'' boomed the announcer at the Interior Ministry parade as a range of men moved past, from would-be suicide bombers sheathed in show-only-your-eyeballs white uniforms to firefighters brandishing Kalashnikovs atop their trucks. ''These troops are molten lava suspended over the head of our enemy!''

Despite such soaring rhetoric, senior officials seem aware of the shrinking possibility of escaping the long-threatened war, as the days trickle away toward a pivotal decision at the United Nations regarding Iraq. That may explain why Baghdad is pursuing apparently contradictory aims, seeking to convince the world that it is committed to disarmament while simultaneously demonstrating its military prowess.

''Iraq has only two choices, a diplomatic policy to continue cooperating with the inspections, and a domestic policy to get ready to defend its land,'' said Muhammad al-Adhami, the chairman of the political science department at Baghdad University and a member of Iraq's Parliament. ''The government is doing its best to avoid war, but when that collapses they have to defend themselves.''

Gone is the sense of deliverance of just a couple weeks ago, when the sight of millions of antiwar demonstrators marching through the streets of the world's capitals convinced the Iraqi government that public opinion would deter the United States from attacking.

Members of the dwindling diplomatic community warned the Iraqis not to put stock in such demonstrations. Far better, they said, to strive to convince those governments still straddling the fence that Baghdad was serious about disarmament.

Hans Blix, the chief weapons inspector, is due to deliver an oral report on Friday on the progress of the inspections. Few expect his assessment to differ much from a string of previous reports -- a mix of criticism for Iraq's failure to answer some 30 key questions about its attempts to develop chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and limited praise for steps just taken, like the destruction of the missiles.

In the written report already delivered to Security Council members, Mr. Blix wondered why the Iraqis waited so long to focus on what they might do to provide the missing evidence that would back up its claim that it basically destroyed such programs in 1991.

Iraq's strategy from the beginning has seemed to be stalling for time, one diplomat here said, trying to stretch out the entire weapons inspection process in the hopes that some event -- another terrorism attack in the United States, a particularly violent Israeli assault on the Palestinians, a confrontation over North Korea's nuclear program -- would distract the Bush administration from pursuing war.

Continue reading the main story
''They know they cannot prevent this attack, so they are going to delay it as long as possible, in hopes that that something happens any place in the world that would prevent it from going forward,'' the diplomat said. ''They say each week, each month that is gained is good for Iraq. The more time that passes, the harder it will be to attack.''

The betting was that hot summer weather, if not public opinion, would forestall any war. But neither is now deemed quite so decisive. The problem, diplomats and others note, is that Iraq keeps doling out tidbits of information, stalling for time when there is none left.

''All these tactics are just too late,'' another diplomat said.

Iraq has slowly acceded to many of the demands made by the weapons inspectors. Since Saturday, following an order from Mr. Blix, it has destroyed 28 of about 120 short-range Al Samoud 2 missiles that according to the United Nations violated the 93-mile range imposed on such weapons by the 1991 Persian Gulf war cease-fire. Interviews with scientists involved in the development or destruction of the various weapons, once stalled, have now resumed.

''What more cooperation do they want?'' said Wamidh Nadhmi, a political science professor at Baghdad University, noting the drumbeat of dismissive remarks from Washington and London. ''They don't even seem to be encouraging it.''

The deliberately paced and very public destruction of the Al Samoud missiles seems designed to give antiwar countries like France, Germany and Russia tangible proof that weapons inspections are working. At the same time Iraq has been presenting various technical arguments and some new paperwork to prove that it dumped its stocks of lethal weapons like VX nerve gas and anthrax into the ground after neutralizing them.

Even as they present arguments about new cooperation and further reports, Iraqi officials project a certain sense that nothing may be enough. Gen. Amir al-Saadi, Mr. Hussein's top weapons adviser, expressed the officials' frustration at a news conference this week when he said that he thought Iraq had done what it could to avoid being found in material breach of Security Council demands that it disarm.

''If Iraq is not in material breach on that count, then if war takes place it is not because Iraq has not done all it can regarding disarmament,'' said the general. ''Iraq is doing all it possibly can in terms of disarmament.''
