

THREATS AND RESPONSES: A COMMAND POST; Reluctant Saudi Arabia Prepares Its Quiet Role in the U.S.-Led War on Iraq
By Craig S. Smith
March 20, 2003

Just a day after this Islamic kingdom declared that it ''will not participate in any way'' in a war against Iraq, Gen. Tommy R. Franks today visited the computer-crammed bunkers here that will serve as the command post for the coming airstrikes against Saddam Hussein's government.

The planned United States-led war against Iraq is highly unpopular in Saudi Arabia, so the Saudi royal family is eager to distance itself from the conflict. Yet the kingdom, worried about angering the United States, is taking part in preparations for the war and will be involved, albeit quietly and obliquely, when it comes.

Western diplomats here say King Fahd's declaration, read by the de facto ruler, Crown Prince Abdullah, in an unusual televised address on Tuesday, was meant for domestic consumption -- with a wink and a nod at the Americans.

An Air Force spokesman at Prince Sultan Air Base made no attempt today to hide the Saudis' participation in the operations center, which is busily identifying Iraqi bombing targets and will perform damage assessments after the bombs fall.

The operations center ''is a multinational organization and includes our hosts,'' said Lt. Col. Joseph LaMarca. The Saudis, he said, ''work in our headquarters building in the actual Combined Air Operations Center,'' as the high-tech command post is known.

Despite the Saudi announcement, Colonel LaMarca said the operations center would continue to ''plan, direct and monitor the execution of all air operations in the Central Command's area of responsibility,'' which includes Iraq.

It is not clear whether the Saudis will lift their ban on using the base for airstrikes against Iraq, or even whether they will allow American aircraft to use Saudi airspace for attacks. Saudi government officials declined to comment today.

General Franks's visit was part of a tour this week to see his chief commanders in the region. At Prince Sultan Air Base, he met with his top Air Force commander, Lt. Gen. Michael Moseley, who runs the operations center and will direct the airstrikes against Iraq.

''General Franks felt it was important to pay a personal visit to his air commander to make sure his commander had everything he needed before potential action,'' said his spokesman, Jim Wilkinson, at the Central Command's headquarters in Doha, Qatar.

The United States has an estimated 5,500 troops based at Prince Sultan Air Base, a sprawling tract of desert that was little more than an airstrip during the Persian Gulf war in 1991. But Washington subsequently spent hundreds of millions of dollars to transform it into one of its largest bases of operations in the Middle East.

Today, it is a hub for fighter aircraft, E-3 Awacs radar planes, other surveillance and reconnaissance aircraft and air-to-air refueling planes.

The Combined Air Operations Center is the base's crown jewel, capable of integrating data from satellites, aerial drones, air and ground surveillance and other intelligence sources to give commanders a real-time view of the battlefield. It was completed only in 2001.

It is ostensibly a Saudi base, but the American troops operate within a secure perimeter inside the main base. The United States military, not the Saudis, controls access to the American area. Western diplomats say the number of American troops at the base is expected to grow to more than 10,000 as the war proceeds.

But Saudi Arabia's ruling royal family has come under increasing pressure to evict the Americans, whom it first invited to help defend the kingdom against Iraq and then to fight the Persian Gulf war. Osama bin Laden's terror campaign was initially propelled by what many fundamentalist Muslims regard as the blasphemous presence of foreign troops on sacred soil. Saudi Arabia is the homeland of the Prophet Muhammad and the site of Islam's two holiest shrines.

Opposition to a new war is almost unanimous here, and anti-American feelings are running high. Saudi Arabia's interior minister, Prince Nayef, said today that some Saudi citizens might even have gone to Iraq to fight against American troops.

Concern that the Saudis would shut down American operations at Prince Sultan led Washington to build a backup base in neighboring Qatar.


''With the operations center in Qatar, the Saudis can always say it's coming from there,'' the diplomat said. Saudi Arabia has resisted American military efforts to station journalists at Prince Sultan, apparently fearing that the journalists would shed unwanted light on the kingdom's participation in the war.

But American officials say the primary air command operations will remain in Saudi Arabia, where the decision makers are based.

The kingdom has hinted recently that it may ask the United States to withdraw its troops once the Iraq war is over. But Western diplomats say that there has been no such request and that, in any case, the current role of the Saudi-based American troops -- surveillance of Iraq -- will end if the United States succeeds in ousting Mr. Hussein.

Prince Sultan Air Base is not the only place in the kingdom where American military operations are under way. At least two new United States military operations have started up close to the Iraq border.

British and American tanker aircraft for air-to-air refueling as well as helicopters for search and rescue operations are based at Arar Air Force Base, Western diplomats say. American troops are also stationed at an air base in Tabuk.
