

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THIRD INFANTRY DIVISION; A Practice Run at Bulldozing Through the Iraqi Border With Kuwait
By Steven Lee Myers
March 14, 2003

Out here in utterly desolate desert, only miles from Iraq, the Army's main ground forces began a practice run early today for the opening moments of a war that could begin within days.

Not long after midnight, after a barrage by artillery batteries and missile strikes by Apache helicopters at a nearby range, military bulldozers gouged breaches across a heavily fortified system of berms, ditches and electrified fences that engineers built earlier this week. It was an exact replica of the internationally patrolled border between Kuwait and Iraq.

With eight breaches opened, the first of what will by later today be some 500 scout vehicles, tanks, armored vehicles and mobile command centers poured through in what officers here called a meticulously choreographed -- and therefore difficult -- maneuver that will closely resemble the start of the ground invasion of Iraq.

''If it's not carefully controlled, we'll get all tangled up,'' said Lt. Col. Steven E. Landis, the executive officer of the Third Division's First Brigade.

Even as leaders in the United States and Europe continue to debate fiercely whether a war against Iraq is justified, the signs that an attack is near are palpable here.

Earlier this month, units of the Third Division, the Army's only full division in Kuwait, left several newly sprouted base camps along Highway 80 and moved farther into the desert, where they now occupy remote, threadbare positions exposed to swinging temperatures and swirling, chafing winds.

Mobile bridges -- unwieldy machines with unfolding steel spans fixed atop the chassis of old M-60 tanks -- have appeared in the desert so that M1-A1 tanks and M2-A2 Bradley armored fighting vehicles can practice crossing small rivers or crevices. Only here there is only sand to cross.

On Wednesday, the First Brigade, one of the division's three brigades, issued small-arms ammunition to its soldiers and ordered them to unseal charcoal-lined suits to protect against chemical weapons.

On Wednesday night, the mess hall from the brigade's previous base, Camp Pennsylvania, delivered its last fully prepared -- and, sort of, hot -- meal to the troops. From now on they will eat less elaborate meals or rations known as Meals Ready to Eat.

Commanders here say they have not yet received orders to mount an attack, but the Third Division's commander, Maj. Gen. Buford C. Blount III, told reporters last week that the division was ready to do so when ordered. Col. William F. Grimsley, commander of the First Brigade Combat Team, a fortified version of his usual brigade, said he could attack on four hours' notice.

This morning's dress rehearsal, which will continue well into this afternoon, involved hundreds of vehicles coursing across miles of featureless desert. It was a last chance to refine a plan that had been months in the making, involving commanders of the Army's V Corps, which oversees the Third Division, and other Army units now massing in Kuwait.

The Third Division, based at Fort Stewart and Fort Benning in Georgia, regularly rotates units through Kuwait, and its units began deploying here as part of the Bush administration's buildup last year. But the V Corps, based in Germany, has only recently arrived and does not normally command the Third Division.

The tactics tested today will be those needed in a war against Iraq and, though only an exercise, reflects the characteristics it is likely to have. Attacks will occur in darkness and begin with overwhelming air and artillery barrages. The techniques to be tested will be precisely those needed not only at the border but also at the waterways that wend through the broad valley of the Tigris and the Euphrates.

''It's the same as a river crossing,'' Colonel Grimsley said, adding that the first significant natural and military obstacle he expected to face was the Euphrates.

The demilitarized zone between Kuwait and Iraq -- lined by berms, ditches and electrified fences and patrolled by United Nations observers -- is not heavily defended on the Iraqi side, but it is heavily mined. The initial long-range strikes are expected to quickly destroy the few border and observation posts the Iraqis have within the demilitarized zone and on its frontier.

''There's not really a threat at the border,'' said Maj. Benjamin M. Matthews, the First Brigade's fire support officer. ''Let's be honest. There's just not a lot up there.''


Still, the exercise also included plans for an evacuation of the wounded. Commanders and soldiers here expressed confidence in the ability of an American-led force to defeat Iraq's military, which suffered greatly during the Persian Gulf war of 1991 and the subsequent sanctions.

By early this morning the exercise was going more or less according to plan. But inevitably there were glitches. One unit of engineers advanced too close to the ''border,'' putting themselves dangerously close to the ''artillery blasts,'' and had to be ordered back. Another unit started slowly when the order to advance came early, apparently catching them by surprise.

Maj. Morris T. Goins, the brigade's operations officer, said the training was necessary to tune and fine-tune battle plans, from the corps level to the squad level. But he noted that any battle was subject to unpredictable actions by the other side.

''Like they say, in any plan the enemy always gets a vote,'' he said.
