

THREATS AND RESPONSES: A PLAN FOR IRAQ; Bush Says U.S. Won't Force Its Ways on a Beaten Iraq
By David E. Sanger
Oct. 12, 2002

President Bush offered assurances today that the United States would ''never seek to impose our culture or our form of government'' on another nation. His aides insisted that even if the United States military were to take over the administration of Iraq after an invasion, it would be as a liberation force, not an occupation force.

Mr. Bush made his comments about his goals during a White House event to mark the anniversary of the invasion of Afghanistan by the American-led coalition, without specific reference to Iraq. He celebrated the successes of the interim Afghan government -- and introduced American military personnel who gave medical care to injured Afghans and taught Afghan children to play baseball.

But his comments seemed aimed at defusing fears around the world about American intentions, only a day after senior members of his administration said it was ''coalescing around'' a concept of placing an American-led military government in Iraq, to be followed by a civilian government and then some form of elected government.

Today the White House altered its explanation of the current thinking. Ari Fleischer, the president's press secretary, said that while ''there will certainly be a role for the military'' in Iraq if Saddam Hussein is dislodged, he expected that Iraqis would not be treated as a former enemy, but rather as a liberated people.

''I dispute that notion'' of occupation, he said. Japan, he noted, ''actively fought the United States'' during World War II, before its postwar occupation. In Iraq in 1991, he noted, many in the Iraqi military surrendered, and he expected that would happen again. ''My point is, the likelihood is much more like Afghanistan, where the people who live right now under a brutal dictator will view America as liberators, not conquerors.''

Mr. Fleischer's comments today were strikingly similar to the way American officials described the occupation of Japan in 1945. They also spoke of themselves as liberators, easing the way to a democratic revolution. In September 1945, the United States military distributed photographs of soldiers handing out candy to Japanese children.

John Dower, in his Pultizer-winning account of the occupation of Japan, ''Embracing Defeat'' (1999), noted that while the Allies were technically in control of Japan, ''from start to finish, the United States alone determined basic policy and exercised decisive command.''

In interviews today, several American officials said they expected the same would be true in Iraq, assuming the American forces are successful in toppling Mr. Hussein. ''What's the choice?'' one senior official said today, adding that: ''It's going to take a long time to find all the weapons, and to keep the country from splitting apart. That will take a while.''

Mr. Fleischer noted that no final decisions about the shape of military control over Iraq have yet been made. ''The objective is stability,'' he told reporters, while saying he had not heard anything about establishing a military commander for the country who would serve in a role analogous to the one Gen. Douglas MacArthur took on in Japan.

Continue reading the main story
In an interview today, Ahmad Chalabi, the leader of the Iraqi National Congress, an umbrella group for the Iraqi opposition, who would presumably play a role in forming a new government, said: ''If the U.S. wants to do it, who are we to say no? We can't stop them. They are talking about demilitarization, and de-Baathification, which is very good, what we want,'' referring to the ruling Baath Party.

''But we would strongly prefer that the administration support our desire for a provisional government of Iraq,'' he added.

The issue of how to describe the American forces in Iraq is an enormously sensitive one for the administration. Mr. Bush often talks about the ''liberation'' of Afghanistan, noting that the United States had no territorial ambitions there -- just a desire to make sure that the country was not a base for Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups. He often speaks of how girls now attend school in Afghanistan, a subject he returned to today.

But Iraq is a far more complex problem. It controls nearly 11 percent of the world's proven oil reserves, and these resources are of paramount importance to the White House, both as a secure source of energy for the world and a revenue stream to rebuild the country, officials say.

Moreover, the presumably well-hidden stores of chemical and biological weapons in Iraq add another complication that was not present in Afghanistan. ''We can't have a free-for-all where the country is fighting internally, and everyone is trying to get their hands on the weapons stores,'' one senior official said.

White House officials seemed particularly unhappy today about the report, in The New York Times this morning, that the occupation would be led by a commander whose role would be parallel to that of General MacArthur, who ruled Japan essentially as a potentate who could issue directives on any subject.

But others said that the fractious country would require such a strong presence. ''Japan wasn't about to fall apart,'' one senior State Department official said today. ''Iraq might well fall apart.''

In one respect, an American-led force in Iraq would resemble the occupation in Japan: It would include a major ''demilitarization'' program, similar to the one in which the United States destroyed Japanese armaments, administration officials said.
