

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE KREMLIN; Russia Softens Opposition To Military Action in Iraq
By Michael Wines
Jan. 31, 2003

Few would call them bellwethers, but there are signs this week that Russia is softening its long-stated skepticism and even hostility toward American military action in Iraq even as the rumble of war appears to be ever closer.

Moreover, United States officials have hopes of speeding that conversion by offering what one called persuasive evidence of Iraq's support for terrorists operating in Russia's troubled Caucasus region.

President Vladimir V. Putin offered a hint of a shift in the Kremlin's position on Tuesday when, at a regional summit meeting in Kiev, Ukraine, he said Russia might support new ''solutions'' to the Iraqi crisis should it be proven that Saddam Hussein was thwarting United Nations weapons inspectors.

Although couched in assurances that the permanent members of the Security Council should approve any actions, Mr. Putin's warning was unmistakable. ''I am not going to say right now what these solutions might be,'' he said, ''but they will be tougher than today's.''

Also on Tuesday, one of the Kremlin's chief spokesmen and strategists, Sergei Yastrzhembsky, appeared to signal a new flexibility in Russia's Iraq policy at a dinner in Washington with American foreign policy experts.

Asked what it would take to persuade Kremlin leaders to offer more support for the White House's stance toward Iraq, Mr. Yastrzhembsky replied that Russia did not need a smoking gun, merely ''a gun.''

The suggestion, experts and government officials here and in the United States said today, is that if Mr. Putin were presented with a convincing argument, even if not an ironclad one, he would accept the idea that an American-led coalition against Saddam Hussein was the only way to end an Iraqi threat.

It would not be the first time he had capitulated. Mr. Putin has often balked at American foreign policy thrusts -- from the White House's abandonment of the cold-war era Antiballistic Missile Treaty to its support for expanding NATO into the former Soviet Union to a 2002 nuclear arms reduction treaty that many Russian experts criticized as weighted in favor of the United States.

In the end, analysts and others say, he has shrugged and accepted each because his judgment is that close ties to the United States are a top priority if Russia is to rebuild its global role.

''Putin has always been much more protective of the relationship with the U.S., and especially with President Bush, than other people in his bureaucracy,'' one senior American administration official said in an interview. ''I think he's preparing the ground for a potential shift, depending on what is presented as evidence and whether it satisfies his domestic concerns.''

What Mr. Putin needs in the Iraq crisis, several said, is enough evidence to bring along Russia's military and security elite, who are still deeply suspicious of American intentions in a nation that was Moscow's key Middle East ally during decades of Soviet rule.

The American official, who refused to be identified, said the United States hoped to provide that evidence in a high-level intelligence presentation to the Kremlin next month.

''We think we've got increasingly convincing evidence of Al Qaeda activities in Iraq of which Baghdad has knowledge, and also links between Al Qaeda cells and terrorists that are operating on or around Russian territory,'' the official said. ''The terrorism element may be more important in producing a hardening of Russia's position than anything on weapons of mass destruction.''

Whether that hardening would translate into Russian support for American military action or something less -- like abstaining rather than opposing the United States in votes on United Nations resolutions -- could well depend on the strength of the case that the United States makes privately to the Kremlin, some officials and experts said.

Mikhail Margelov, who heads the international relations committee in the upper house of the Russian Parliament, said today that Mr. Putin's generally pro-American policies had broad support within the ruling party in Parliament.

But even there, he said, few have been persuaded that Iraq presents a direct threat requiring an American military response.

Continue reading the main story
''If there is any evidence on terrorism,'' he said in a telephone interview from Strasbourg, France, ''that would affect the Russian position.''

Mr. Yastrzhembsky was said by two people to have pressed home the need for clear evidence of Iraqi misconduct during his three-day visit to the United States, which ended Wednesday. The Kremlin's top adviser on Chechnya, he met with the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, and other Bush administration experts, as well as with private analysts and journalists.

Perhaps even more than in the United States, terrorism has become a unifying issue for Russian politicians and citizens alike. Since October alone, 129 Russians have died in a devastating takeover of a Moscow theater by Chechen guerrillas and 72 more were killed in a suicide bombing at the main government office in Grozny, Chechnya's capital.

The United States, which was holding informal meetings in Washington with Chechen separatists as recently as two years ago, has since then moved far closer to the view that terrorism is an important aspect of the war. That is in part because intelligence-gathering has improved.

American proof of Iraqi ties to Chechen terrorism could well galvanize not only the Russian bureaucracy but also Russian public opinion in favor of greater support for taking military action against Iraq.
