

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE CONTINENT; European Leaders Dig In to Defend Their Positions on Iraq
By Elaine Sciolino
Feb. 27, 2003

As the Bush administration stepped up lobbying efforts for its new resolution on Iraq, Europe's leaders worked determinedly today to ensure against defections from their well-defined ranks on the issue.

Standing side by side, but certainly not in lock step, President Jacques Chirac of France and Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain today held firm to their positions on waging war against Iraq. In Moscow, President Vladimir V. Putin and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany held a hastily arranged meeting on the Iraq crisis tonight to defuse a White House effort to reverse Russian opposition to military action.

Even the breaking of bread at a lunch at Élysée Palace today did not ease tensions or change minds about the usefulness of the new United Nations Security Council resolution. That measure, submitted by the United States, Britain and Spain, would declare President Saddam Hussein in violation of the requirement that he disarm and clear the way for the use of force.

''We are opposed to every new resolution,'' Mr. Chirac told reporters at the entrance to the Élysée after lunch. ''We have a common goal of eliminating the arms of mass destruction in Iraq, but we do not share the same view on the means to attain this goal.'' France's official position is that intrusive United Nations weapons inspections are working and that they should be reinforced, not abandoned, in an effort to avoid war.

Mr. Aznar who faces overwhelming antiwar sentiment at home, was equally dug in, backing President Bush and calling a new resolution ''opportune.''

In an interview with Spanish radio earlier in the day, Mr. Aznar said a protracted inspection process would serve Mr. Hussein's interests. ''I do not favor giving tyrants more time, because they will not use it to disarm, but to arm themselves,'' he said.

Relations between Mr. Chirac and Mr. Aznar turned frosty after Mr. Aznar joined seven other European leaders in writing an op-ed article published in several newspapers in favor of the American position.

Shortly after the two men met, both houses of the French Parliament debated the merits of the French position. Not one speaker diverged significantly from the government's official position.

Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin confidently told the French Senate that the new resolution had failed to win the nine votes required for passage by the 15-member Security Council. ''There is therefore no reason to evoke the hypothesis'' of France having to use its veto power to quash it, he added.

At the moment, the American-sponsored draft resolution has the staunch support of only four countries on the Council, while five countries including France and Russia, which have veto power, support a counterproposal to reinforce the inspections.

Both Mr. de Villepin and France's prime minister, Jean-Pierre Raffarin, sought to cast themselves as the upholders of international law, and they emphasized that France was by no means ''a pacifist nation.''

In the parliamentary debates, François Hollande, who represented the Socialist Party in the National Assembly, urged France to use its veto power in the Security Council. ''The veto is the logical next step to France's position, since it considers this war pointless and dangerous,'' he said.

Many of the other speakers sought to reach out to the United States, where anti-French sentiment has been running high. ''Our gratitude to the United States is complete,'' said André Dulait, president of the Senate commission for foreign and defense policy. He added that ''the memory of their soldiers dying for us is still strong,'' but that the time to use force in Iraq had not yet come.

But Claude Estier, who spoke in the Senate for the Socialist Party, was not so soft, saying, ''The objective of the United States in the Middle East is nothing less than a total remodeling of the region.'' He added, ''President Bush and the hawks in his government believe that they are on a messianic quest to reshape the world and will oppose anyone that goes against their will.''

Meanwhile, after three hours of meetings and dinner in the Kremlin, Mr. Putin and Mr. Schröder restated their opposition to the American-sponsored resolution on Iraq, with Mr. Putin saying the existing regime of United Nations weapons inspections was ''far from being exhausted.''

''The position of Russia is clear,'' he said. ''We consider unacceptable a resolution that would give the right to automatically begin war.''

But Mr. Putin was careful not to cast his remarks as a rebuke to the White House. He said American pressure on Mr. Hussein had been useful because ''it makes Iraq more compliant in the solution of many issues dealing with cooperation'' with United Nations inspectors. ''I have never heard from the American president that he wants to wage a war,'' Mr. Putin said. ''He also wants to solve the problem by peaceful means.''

Their meeting came as a senior United States official in Moscow, in sharp contrast to Russian statements, expressed guarded hopes that Russia, China and other permanent members of the Security Council would accede to the White House's hard-line stance on Iraqi disarmament when the new resolution reaches a vote in mid-March.

''I don't think there will be a Russian veto,'' said the senior official. ''We're still working. We're not there yet. But we've got two weeks.''
