

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | CENTRAL IRAQ; Endless Supply Convoy Is Frustrated Endlessly
By Dexter Filkins
March 28, 2003

The American convoy loaded with fuel and ammunition resumed its northward march today, marshaling its 300 trucks in a line that stretched for miles.

Then the Iraqis began firing, and the convoy turned around, leaving its stores of shells and diesel fuel in the same place they were three days ago.

The firefight that unfolded today in front of the American caravan illustrated the difficulty the military is having in resupplying its troops at the front line.

The rapid advance of American forces through Iraq has left the spearhead of the army 300 miles away from its main base. As a result, the supply lines are stretched thin and are vulnerable to the kinds of attacks that have left this convoy standing still since Tuesday.

''The firing was very close,'' said Col. John Pomfret, who is leading the convoy. ''We're going to have to wait.''

Colonel Pomfret will try again to take his convoy north on Friday, in hopes of supplying the 22,000 American Marines gathered about 10 miles to the north. He says that despite the recent attacks he will be able to get his supplies through without any disruption of the forces' ability to fight.

But here in the parched plains of central Iraq it is much less clear that the American military can stop the harassing Iraqi attacks that have been slowing the caravans down.

The Marines running the convoys say they can fight their way through just about anything the Iraqis can throw at them. But with their supply lines reaching all the way back to Kuwait, the experience of this convoy suggests that the Marines may be doing a lot more fighting than they bargained for.

The Marine convoy is a gigantic thing, involving trucks and tankers and jeeps and tanks, carrying thousands of gallons of diesel fuel, millions of rounds of ammunition and crate upon crate of ready-made meals. So large is this caravan that it takes several hours for all of its vehicles to pass through a single point. Among its cargo is 160,000 gallons of fuel and 180 tons of ammunition.

Yet it is a measure of the voraciousness of the modern military that this convoy, 300 vehicles long, carries only enough supplies to last the First Marine Division a few days. Its guns can shoot thousands of shells in a single day; it takes as much as five gallons of fuel just to start the engine of an M-1 tank. The key to the Marines' logistical success is the ability to keep the train going, to keep more caravans, just as big, rolling north.

So far, the path of the convoys as they travel across central Iraq has been anything but smooth. They have come under constant fire from Iraqi soldiers, who often wait for the tanks and heavy armored vehicles to pass before opening fire. Each attack, however small, almost always requires the convoy to stop, if only to allow its soldiers to respond.

In the past three days here, the Iraqi attacks against the Marine convoy have been almost ceaseless. First came an ambush Tuesday night, which left 23 Iraqis and 1 American dead.

Then a group of Iraqis attacked the convoy's forward base Wednesday, resulting in a firefight that left five Marines wounded. Then today, as the convoy tried to resume its journey north, it ran into a battle between American and Iraqi forces a little more than a mile from the encampment.

In each case here, the Iraqi attacks have been carried out by small groups of soldiers, who capitalize on quick surprise assaults.

Since this afternoon, the fighting has been continuous. Cobra gunships raced back and forth to the front lines, their racks full of rockets on the way out and empty on the way in. Twice this evening, American officers sounded warnings for poison gas. All through the night, the ground shook from the telltale explosions of American B-52 strikes.

All the while, for three days the convoy was still. Lashing sandstorms have not helped the advance either.

The needs of the Marines battling at the front are not dire yet, officers here say. But the constant fire from the Iraqis suggests that the effort to supply American fighters at the front could be a battle itself.

''The logistical people do not want to be the cause of a pause in operations,'' Lt. Col. Bob Weinkel said.

The Marine convoys have armed themselves heavily to repel the Iraqi attacks. Each caravan is shadowed by several tanks and armored cars, and they have responded ferociously to the ambushes. The Marine commanders say they need to respond quickly and decisively to such attacks, in large part because they are so vulnerable.

The Marine convoy stuck near Diwaniyah, for instance, has more than a dozen 60-foot-long fuel tankers. Each one carries 5,000 gallons of diesel fuel.

''I think about it a lot, getting hit,'' said a diesel truck driver. ''I'm a sitting duck.''

The Marines themselves, even the driver of the smallest water truck, is ready to taken down his gun and fight. It is that, more than anything, the Marines say, that makes them confidant they will be to keep the caravans rolling north.

''We're not just truck drivers,'' Lieutenant Colonel Weinkel said. ''We're truck drivers with guns.''
