

A NATION AT WAR: REFUGEES; About 100 Non-Iraqis Cross Border Into Jordan
By Ian Fisher
March 21, 2003

''Afraid?'' asked the Iraqi truck driver, some 10 miles from crossing back into his home country on the day this war began. ''Afraid of what?''

The bravado near the border between Jordan and Iraq broke down quickly: in fact, the driver, Ali Hussein, 50, said he had still not decided if he would actually drive the 360 miles back to Baghdad -- especially not if bombs were falling in the vast western desert of Iraq.

Like most Iraqis, he had harsh words for America. Unlike most Iraqis, he said aloud that he thought the war would be short and he might be back on the road soon.

''Iraq is not strong anymore,'' he said. ''This war will be a one-sided war -- from the American side.''


In his pokey tanker truck, it is a long way -- 14 hours -- to Baghdad. Still, even here at the only border crossing from Jordan, there were early signs of war.

Traffic on this usually heavily traveled road was sparse today, with the occasional sighting of a military helicopter. Overnight the first refugees arrived: more than 100 non-Iraqis, most of them guest workers from Sudan, fleeing Iraq just before American and British strikes began.

El Amin Yehya Muhammad, 52, who moved to Iraq from Sudan 15 years ago, said he was working in the little cafeteria he owns in Baghdad on Wednesday when a call from the Sudanese Embassy came about 10 a.m.: buses would be provided for anyone who wanted to leave.

He rushed home, packed three suitcases, a duffle bag and a briefcase, and made it to the bus with his wife and three children in time to leave, with 17 other Sudanese, by 12:30 p.m.

This morning the family was sitting inside a new canvas tent, the sides flapping in a strong sandstorm that whipped up the desert. The Jordanian Red Crescent provided the family with blankets, mats, mattresses, food -- all with the idea of getting them out of Jordan immediately.

Eager not to repeat the problems of the last war here in 1991, when the country was flooded with about a million refugees from Iraq, Jordan is limiting the stay of non-Iraqi refugees to 72 hours. Mr. Muhammad said he was happy to leave Jordan -- and his long Iraqi life --behind.

''I know that my country is very poor,'' he said. ''But it's a disaster what we saw in Iraq. What is going to happen to Iraq in this war is really frightening.''

By nightfall today, a Jordanian relief official said 67 people were living in a refugee camp about 36 miles from the border: 54 Sudanese, 10 Somalis, 2 Chadians and an Egyptian.

In the gusty winds, with sand blotting visibility at times to just a few yards, Jordanian workers wrestled all day with tarps to erect about 90 tents, enough, an official said, to shelter about 1,000 people. Between this camp and another nearby for Iraqis, there is room for 40,000 or more refugees, though there were no signs yet that large numbers were making their way to Jordan.

As in much of this Arab country, there were two antiwar demonstrations today in Amman, the capital. A Bedouin shepherd threw a rock at a car carrying American journalists, a highly visible sign near the border here that the United States was being seen as an aggressor trying to occupy Arab lands.

''We believe the Americans are doing the worst thing in the world right now,'' said Ahmed Awawdi, a 23-year-old Jordanian helping to build a long row of toilets for refugees. ''We support Saddam and think he is going to win.''

Unlike the northern borders with Iran and Turkey, or the south with Kuwait, this western border with Jordan is far calmer: it is largely empty and thus carries little potential for uprising or infighting among Kurds or Shias.

Still, the region is expected to be a target for American operations since United States officials have said they believe that the western desert may contain weapons of mass destruction, just possibly missiles pointing at Israel as in the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Rumors have been rife that American Special Forces have been operating inside the Iraqi border for some weeks.

The troops' presence is a sensitive issue: Jordan, a country where more than half the population of five million is Palestinian, is officially opposed to the war. As an American ally, however, it has allowed several thousand American Special Forces into its eastern border with Iraq. Officials say they are there only to operate Patriot antimissile batteries and carry out ''self-defense missions.''

There has been little sign of the offensive itself near here -- with the possible exception of an ambiguous explosion on Wednesday morning.

A Jordanian border guard said he heard a huge bang and saw a plume of black smoke rise about half a mile inside Iraq. Iraqi border guards, he said, told him that an American plane bombed a communications site, though he said he himself heard no plane. He also said he did not think the war would be an easy one for the Americans.

''No, it's going to be difficult,'' the guard said. ''From all I know about Iraqis, they are tough -- determined to survive.''
