

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE KURDS; Iran Has Reportedly Pledged Help in Ousting Al Qaeda Militants From Northern Iraq
By Daniel J. Wakin
Nov. 6, 2002

An Iraqi Kurdish leader said today that Iran had promised military help to oust Islamic militants suspected of having ties with Al Qaeda from a swath of northern Iraq.

The militants are believed to have carried out raids, assassinations and bombings in the region, including an attack on a Kurdish checkpoint outside Halabja, near the border with Iran, on Monday night.

The Kurdish leader, Jalal Talabani, said in an interview here that he had not consulted the United States about such a plan. He said he would expect nothing in return from the United States for waging such a fight, nor did he say whether American approval would be sought for the action. ''They are America's enemies and the Kurdish people's enemies and the enemies of the people of the Middle East,'' he said of the militants, adding, ''The day we need America's support we will go and talk to them.''

He added: ''We are planning to do it with the support from our brothers in Iran to clean the area of this terrorist group.'' He did not elaborate on the kind of aid Iran would give and declined to provide the timing or details of a possible attack. ''They promised to help us in this plan,'' he said.

Mr. Talabani, echoing other Kurdish officials, said the militants in northern Iraq are Arabs who came from Afghanistan and number about 120, with several hundred Kurdish allies. They operate in a mountainous patch on the border with Iran.

Kurdish leaders contend that the militants have ties with Al Qaeda, but United States officials are skeptical and have not given direct military aid, as they did for the Philippines and Yemen after the attacks on Sept. 11. Other Islamic-oriented parties operate in the area.

Mr. Talabani hedged a bit. ''I cannot say if they are Taliban or Al Qaeda, but they are people from Afghanistan, and they are well trained there,'' he said.

Mr. Talabani leads the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, one of the two main Kurdish groups that hold sway in northern Iraq under the protection of American and allied warplanes. He was on a mission to reassure neighboring countries that the Kurds of northern Iraq have no intention of establishing an independent state. He arrived in Syria on Friday after four days in Iran.

''The message which we are always giving to Turkey, Iran and Syria is about the Kurdish determination to remain within the framework of Iraq,'' he said, ''to have a united, democratic, federative parliamentary Iraq, not to support any separatist movement.''

Syria, Iran and particularly Turkey, which fought a 15-year war against its own Kurdish insurgency, are fearful that Kurdish independence could stir similar desires in their own Kurdish populations.

It was unclear whether Mr. Talabani's assertions about taking on the militants were merely posturing. But whether the offensive he described comes to pass, his statement portrayed the Iraqi Kurds as fighting on the side of the United States as they seek a role in a Iraqi government free of Saddam Hussein.

In the clash last night, the militants attacked a Patriotic Union of Kurdistan checkpoint outside Halabja, Mr. Talabani said. They left behind two dead, one an Arab and the other a Kurd, and retrieved other casualties, he said, while the Kurdish forces suffered two dead and two wounded.

The Iraqi Kurds have thousands of men under arms and have built the semblance of a ministate, paving roads, building schools and reconstructing villages. Allied planes began enforcing a no-flight zone over Iraq after the Persian Gulf war.

One question is whether the Iraqi Kurdish fighters would take part in military actions against the Iraqi Army if war breaks out. Mr. Talabani said he had not been asked to do so by the Americans. ''It depends on the agreement between Iraqi opposition and the United States,'' he said.

He also said he was opposed to long-term American control of Iraq. ''We would not fight it, but of course politically we will oppose it,'' he said.

Representatives of the 3.6 million Iraqi Kurds, after years of internal fighting, took an important step toward unity last month when their parliament met for the first time in six years. It discussed a draft constitution that called for an Arab-Kurdish federation in Iraq. The Kurdish entity would have its own defense force, a legislature and an executive branch, though the central government would control foreign affairs and decisions about oil investment.

The proposed Iraqi Kurdish capital would be Kirkuk, a potentially explosive idea. The Turks have threatened to seize Iraqi territory if the Kurds take Kirkuk Province, which is rich in oil and has a volatile mix of Turkmen, Arabs and Kurds. Arabs elsewhere in Iraq may resent Kurdish domination of oil interests in the province.

But Mr. Talabani dismissed such fears, saying that greater oil reserves lay elsewhere and that the Kurds had promised to share the oil. He also backed away from the suggestion that Kirkuk would be a Kurdish capital. ''It is not the last decision,'' he said.

Iraqi opposition groups are expected to meet this month in Brussels to coordinate their efforts. Mr. Talabani said he had high hopes that the parties would come to an agreement over a post-Saddam structure.
