

TRACES OF TERROR: POLITICAL MEMO; With Focus Shifting to Iraq, Domestic Issues Fade
By Adam Nagourney
Sept. 6, 2002

The prospect of weeks of debate in Congress about granting President Bush the authority to oust Saddam Hussein means that events abroad, rather than the domestic issues pushed by Democrats this summer, could dominate the nation's political discussion for easily half of the general election campaign this fall.

Several Republicans said today that the focus on Iraq would serve the political needs of their party going into the close Congressional elections.

Democrats, in a clear sign of concern, have begun in recent days to speak out on the merits of an invasion, though some worried that they were playing into Republican hands by doing so.

Although setting the agenda in a political debate is typically the first step toward victory, leaders from both parties said they had seen no evidence that voters are ready for war in Iraq, or that any member of Congress would be hurt by opposing Mr. Bush on this. While Republicans may have gained a tactical advantage by moving the nation's attention beyond its borders, even Republicans said they had seen no evidence that a debate over military intervention would affect the outcome of this Congressional contest.

Thus, the critical question now may not be the outcome of the debate about Iraq, but rather how long it lasts -- and when, or if, the Democrats can turn it back to the home turf.

''The public has not been convinced,'' said Representative John Shimkus, Republican of Illinois, recounting conversations he had with constituents before Congress returned from its summer recess this week. ''First, they don't see a correlation to Sept. 11 and Iraq. And second, they are unsure of the threat.''

Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the moderate Connecticut Democrat who has advocated removing Mr. Hussein for more than a decade, said that when he was home, he found ''most people wanted to talk about the economy.'' He added that ''when they wanted to talk about Iraq, one of the things that bothers them is that our allies are not with us.''

For the most part, Democrats today shied away from suggesting that Mr. Bush had moved to force a vote on Capitol Hill to affect the course of the Congressional campaigns this fall. Even so, by design or not, Mr. Bush's decision to push the vote has shaken up the election landscape in a way that leaders of both parties were trying to assess.

There was agreement among leaders of both parties today that a debate about war in Iraq is likely to shift attention from the domestic issues -- with which Democrats believe they can win control of both houses of Congress -- to national security, an issue on which the Republican party has traditionally enjoyed an advantage.

The discourse over war seems likely as well to highlight what is emerging as a sharp contrast between the urgency of Mr. Bush, as he pushes to remove Mr. Hussein, and the tentativeness of the Democrats about what, if anything, to do in Baghdad.

''The public has a greater confidence right now in this president and in the Republican Party on issues of foreign policy and homeland security than they do the Democratic Party,'' said Representative Thomas M. Davis III, chairman of the committee responsible for keeping the House under Republican control in November.

That was a matter of concern for some Democrats today. ''For the last several months, we were talking about health care and Social Security and domestic issues,'' one official said. ''And now we're talking about Iraq.''

But in a reflection of polls that suggest Americans remain uncertain about an invasion of Iraq, Mr. Davis laughed today when asked if he had talked to his members to get a sense of Republicans in Congress about an intervention.

''You don't need to talk to them,'' he said. ''You can just look at their public statements. You've got Larry Craig of Idaho saying he's not sure we should be going in there.''

Republicans said that they expected national security to remain a recurring issue in the fall campaigns, even after Congress adjourns.

''It is perfectly fair game to talk about national security records,'' said Mitch Bainwol, the executive director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. ''We'll see these issues gain salience as we get closer to the election.''

Some members of both parties predicted that, in the end, most of Congress would back a resolution authorizing Mr. Bush to act.

''By the time the president makes the case over the next few days, there will be overwhelming support for action,'' said Representative Roy Blunt, Republican of Missouri.

Such an outcome would, presumably, make it that much more difficult for Republicans to use Iraq as an issue to differentiate themselves from Democrats this fall. Still, if Republicans are seeking to run out the clock on the Democrats -- which is what many Democrats think is going on -- the debate unfolding on Capitol Hill would seem, by design or not, to serve that end.

''There is some real skepticism in the Senate Democratic caucus about the sudden urgency of the situation,'' said James Jordan, the executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. ''Obviously, the White House has plenty of incentive to try to change the subject this late in the election cycle.''
