

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INSPECTORS; U.N. Teams Begin Analysis Of Documents From the Iraqis
By Julia Preston With Mark Landler
Dec. 9, 2002

Enormous troves of documents containing Iraq's declarations on its weapons programs arrived at the United Nations offices in Vienna and New York today. Arms experts immediately began the daunting job of determining whether the material reveals any illegal arms activity.

A 2,100-page report detailing Iraq's nuclear activities, packed into a green suitcase, arrived in the evening at the headquarters of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna. Inspectors there lost no time assembling a team of six people, including three Arabic speakers, to scrutinize it and translate the Arabic portions.

''We have a small team that is going to screen it in order to assess the amount of effort we need to put in in the upcoming week,'' said Jacques Baute, the leader of the nuclear agency's team for Iraq.

Other documents arrived at the United Nations Headquarters around 8:30 p.m. after being ferried by the weapons team from Baghdad to Cyprus and from there through Frankfurt to New York. The bundles were headed for the offices of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, which monitors chemical and biological weapons and long-range missiles. Hans Blix, the director, was to take a first look to figure out how to organize the work ahead.

Mr. Blix's team also received the copy of the declarations destined for the Security Council under the terms of its Resolution 1441, which set up the toughened weapons inspections that began in Iraq on Nov. 27. The 15 nations on the Council, including the United States, decided on Friday not to take possession of their copies until Mr. Blix has removed for his confidential safekeeping any information that might be used by rogue nations or terrorists to make prohibited weapons.

[But United Nations officials and diplomats said that in a surprise decision late Sunday, the Security Council agreed to give the United States, Russia, France, China and Britain full access to Iraq's declaration, The Associated Press reported. The decision means that Washington will not have to wait to begin its own analysis and translation.

[Under the agreement, the other 10 Council members, including Syria, will only see the declaration once it is translated, analyzed and gleaned of sensitive material -- including possible instructions on bomb-making.]

Mr. Blix and the director of the nuclear inspection team, Mohamed ElBaradei, are keenly aware that analyses of the declarations, which run more than 12,000 pages in all, would take many months under ordinary circumstances. But they will have to move much more quickly to satisfy the demands of the United States and other countries that are skeptical that President Saddam Hussein has really been truthful about his secret arms projects.

United Nations officials said the long down time the inspectors had before going back to work in Iraq could now pay off, since they have been able to study and absorb Iraq's previous arms declarations. Before the inspections were suspended in December 1998, Iraq made three declarations on long-range missiles, three on chemical weapons and five on its biological programs, a United Nations official said.

''The silver lining in the fact that we have not been inspecting is that we have instead been familiarizing ourselves with our data base,'' said Ewen Buchanan, the spokesman for the weapons team here.

The documents will be turned over in New York to a team of about 15 experts headed by Jean-Louis Rolland, a former French military officer who is a chemical weapons expert and now is chief of the analysis unit of the weapons team here. They will make an initial assessment to determine how much of the documentation is new and how much was included by Iraq in past declarations.

A new requirement under Resolution 1441 is for Iraq to submit a complete declaration of all of its civilian chemical and biological industries that could possibly be taking part in secret weapons programs. Iraqi officials and Mr. Blix had raised doubts about whether Iraqi officials could mobilize the necessary documents on those industries by the 30-day deadline set by the resolution. But Iraq appears to have provided a mountain of paper in the appointed time.

The Russian Foreign Ministry, in a statement, hailed the declaration and said it confirms Iraq's ''commitment to act in compliance'' with the resolution.

By contrast, the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, said he would not rush to judge the declaration, but he said past Iraqi declarations had turned out to be ''a pack of lies.''

The atomic agency said that an initial assessment of the report would be made in 7 to 10 days and that Mr. ElBaradei would present the results to the Security Council on Dec. 19.

''We are going to begin immediately the painstaking and systematic process of checking the veracity of the document against the facts that our inspectors find on the ground,'' the agency said in a statement.

Mr. ElBaradei, who left Vienna for Japan on Saturday, pleaded for patience with the review process, saying his agency needed time ''to do a proper job.''

Atomic agency officials said their preliminary analysis indicated there were some new elements in the documents -- a claim made by Iraq officials before the delivery. The agency officials did not give details.
