THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; Iraqi Says Arms Destruction Will Cease if U.S. Attacks
By Neil MacFarquhar
March 3, 2003

A senior government official warned today that Iraq would halt the destruction of its short-range missiles if the United States tried to circumvent the United Nations Security Council to attack his country.

The official, Gen. Amir al-Saadi, President Saddam Hussein's top liaison to the United Nations weapons inspectors, also said he believed that Iraq and the inspectors were narrowing the gaps in a number of outstanding questions about missing stocks of chemical and biological weapons that Iraq said it had destroyed more than a decade ago.

For example, recent excavations at the Aziziyeh firing range southwest of Baghdad, he said, showed remnants of nearly 157 R-400 bombs that had contained anthrax that Iraq destroyed in the summer of 1991. Because eight shells were still intact, he said at a news conference, weapons inspectors could test them for the biological agent.

The general said another six Al Samoud 2 short-range missiles had been crushed under bulldozers today, bringing to 10 the number destroyed since Saturday, the United Nations' deadline to begin the process. He said the reason the government had not released any pictures of the destroyed missiles was that the decision to demolish them was a painful one for all Iraqis. But the step was deemed worthwhile considering the stakes, he said.

''My task and my only task is to remove all excuses for waging war,'' the general said, adding that ''if war takes place, it is not because Iraq has not done all it can regarding disarmament.''

Destroying many missiles by next Friday, when Hans Blix, one of the United Nation's chief weapons inspectors, is due to report to the Security Council, would bolster the arguments of those countries seeking to give the inspectors more time.

General Saadi said his country could destroy about six missiles a day, depending on the difficulties of unloading the fuel and otherwise dismantling them for destruction. Iraq is thought to have 100 of the missiles and components for about 20 more.

But the general said Iraq could reverse its decision to destroy the weapons, saying that if the United States ''is not going the legal way, then why should we continue?''

Mr. Blix ordered the weapons destroyed because they exceeded the 93-mile limit set for Iraqi missiles by the Persian Gulf war cease-fire terms in 1991. Iraq has disputed the United Nations' analysis, and has said it is unwarranted for the United Nations inspectors to single out for destruction a missile unrelated to weapons of mass destruction.

The schedule for the destruction of the missiles was left up to the Iraqis to give them a chance to prove how serious they are about disarmament, a senior United Nations official said. Iraqi officials have said that the fact that they are destroying missiles when a war might be weeks away was a clear sign of their cooperation.

''These weapons are quite useful, but they are not decisive,'' General Saadi said.

He said recently completed rockets were the easiest to demolish because they were near the destruction site and had not yet been filled with fuel, which is toxic and takes about three hours to drain.

He said Iraq and the weapons inspectors had two teams working on the missile destruction, so the number destroyed might vary from day to day. A second casting chamber, used to mold propellant for different missiles, was also destroyed today.

Iraq and the weapons inspectors also opened a series of discussions on how to quantify the chemical and biological weapons that Iraq insists it secretly destroyed in 1991, often by pouring them into the ground. Iraq says new scientific techniques should prove how much was destroyed. Demetrius Perricos, Mr. Blix's deputy, told reporters on Saturday that weapons inspectors were skeptical but willing to hear the Iraqi proposal.

General Saadi said 550 mustard gas shells that the previous round of inspections, which ended in 1998, had deemed missing were all in one truck that was burned during uprisings after the gulf war. He said that they were were included in the numbers destroyed by weapons inspectors previously but that they were not properly tallied.

As for the 157 newly excavated R-400 bombs containing anthrax, United Nations inspectors took samples from three intact bombs today, according to Hiro Ueki, the spokesman for the weapons inspectors. Earlier, inspectors had abandoned work at the site because of the danger from unexploded ordnance.

General Saadi said the anthrax not loaded into bombs had been dumped at a site called Al Hakim that remains undisturbed. Similarly, he said that a ton and a half of VX nerve agent was dumped at Al Muthana and that it could be confirmed through soil analysis.

The United States has accused Iraq of hiding its weapons of mass destruction and has argued that the country's statements to the contrary are merely attempts to buy time.

General Saadi noted a recent American television program that detailed how nuclear-tipped bombs could crash into underground bunkers where such weapons are believed to be hidden. Because modern bombs have to be programmed with geographic coordinates, he suggested it would be far less costly for the United States to give the weapons inspectors the coordinates rather than start a war.
