
A NATION AT WAR: WITH THE TROOPS | THIRD INFANTRY DIVISION; Closing In on Baghdad, U.S. Troops Batter Iraqis
By Steven Lee Myers
March 24, 2003

The Army's Third Infantry Division plunged deep into Iraq today, skirmishing with the Iraqi Army and militia forces along the Euphrates River as it neared the outer ring of Baghdad's defenses.

Backed by unfettered air strikes and long-range artillery, the division's lead units crossed the long, jagged escarpment north of Najaf by midday and battered overwhelmed Iraqi troops who tried to slow the advance from rudimentary sand-bagged positions at the crest.

The escarpment rises west of the Euphrates to a broad, flat plain of scrub desert, which was peppered this afternoon with the smoking wreckage of Iraqi anti-aircraft weapons and artillery batteries struck by Air Force A-10 ground attack aircraft. Col. William F. Grimsley, the commander of the division's First Brigade, said that more than 30 Iraqi weapons had been destroyed, including three tanks.

Security restrictions imposed by American commanders prevent the reporting of precise locations of American forces. But by this evening, three days after first crossing the Iraqi border to the west of attacking American Marine and British forces, the Third Infantry Division had advanced roughly two-thirds of the way to Baghdad, where commanders expect to encounter strong resistance from Republican Guard divisions that are better equipped and considered more loyal to President Saddam Hussein than regular army units.

''No doubt, they know we're coming for sure now,'' said Maj. Morris T. Goins, the First Brigade's operations officer.

The division's advance has swept American forces past the cities of Nasiriya, Samawa and now Najaf, the burial site of Ali, a cousin of the Prophet Muhammad and one of the holiest sites of the Shiite branch of Islam. The golden dome of the city's mosque -- a pilgrimage site -- glinted in the sun this evening as thousands of American tanks, artillery batteries and other vehicles surged by in long, grinding columns.

Those cities, the principal ones along the Euphrates River, have not fallen so much as simply been passed by.

The Third Brigade seized the Tallil airfield south of Nasiriya early Saturday, as well as a bridge spanning the Euphrates northwest of the city, but did not occupy the city itself.

Likewise, the Second Brigade clashed with Iraqi forces on the outskirts of Samawa on Saturday night, lighting the sky with red tracer rounds and artillery blasts, but entered the city only briefly today, to destroy the headquarters of Mr. Hussein's Baath Party.

As a result, the Army's advance has left behind pockets of resistance, something that was evident today in fierce fighting in Nasiriya, in which a number of American marines were killed and others captured.

As the First Brigade pressed northward, more than 200 Iraqis surrendered, including a colonel, who gave up at an ammunition plant. Colonel Grimsley said many of those who surrendered had new uniforms and weapons, as well as large amounts of cash, suggesting that they had been newly recruited for Mr. Hussein's defense.

The brigade's companies collected prisoners in small groups on the open desert, or herded them into pens of concertina wire. Soon, they became overwhelmed. The lieutenant of a cavalry troop guarding nine Iraqi soldiers lying face down on the desert floor, their hands bound behind them, asked a reporter if he had come to take them off his hands.

The First Brigade of the Third Infantry suffered only two minor casualties today, officers said. On Saturday, there were initial reports -- still not confirmed by the Pentagon -- that four soldiers were missing after the Third Brigade lost two scout Humvees, while two other soldiers were wounded in separate firefights.

Despite suffering few casualties, the intensity of the resistance has surprised Third Division commanders. They had expected Iraq's regular army troops, most of them Shiite conscripts commanded by the politically dominant Sunnis of Iraq, to capitulate rather than fight.

One senior officer spoke of intelligence reports that commanders of Iraq's 11th Infantry Division, arrayed around Nasiriya, were using threats to make soldiers fight. Mr. Hussein's government also has quasi-militia fighters -- Saddam Fedayeen, or Martyrs of Saddam -- who continued to resist. Those fighters, officers said, were among those who clashed fiercely with the Second Brigade late Saturday and with the First Brigade today.

''These little objectives,'' Colonel Grimsley told his officers by radio today, referring to the division's planned targets, ''have turned out to be bigger than expected.''

He estimated that 30 to 40 Iraqis had died in today's fighting.

One soldier from a support unit attached to the Third Infantry was killed and a second injured in a vehicle accident in southern Iraq this morning. --------------------

Army Copters to Attack Iraqi Guard

(By The New York Times), WITH THE 101st AIRBORNE DIVISION, in western Iraq, March 23 -- A fleet of helicopter gunships from the 101st Airborne Division of the United States Army flew about 200 miles into Iraqi territory today, preparing to attack the Republican Guard divisions that defend Baghdad.

More than 70 Apache helicopters, equipped with Hellfire missiles, flew in formation to a staging area in the desert, accompanied by Black Hawk helicopters carrying troops and giant Chinook twin-rotors hauling 16,000-pound containers of food, fuel and ammunition.

The helicopters met virtually no resistance, flying far from centers of population.
