

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUSSEIN'S DOMAIN; If War Hits, Kurds See Way to Grab Old Lands
By David Rohde
March 14, 2003

Before leaving Kurdish-controlled territory here this morning for his nearby village on the Iraqi-controlled side, a stocky 31-year-old Arab farmer talked about how much this land meant to him. He said he came here as a child and that this stretch of fertile plain in northern Iraq has been his home for the last 25 years. He thanked Saddam Hussein for bringing him here and making his life so bountiful.

''I won't leave,'' he said. ''I intend to live here until I die.''

The farmer, who would not give his name, is one of tens of thousands of Arabs moved north by Mr. Hussein and resettled in and around the oil-rich cities of Kirkuk and Mosul. Under a program known as ''Arabization,'' the government expelled Kurds from villages and cities over the last three decades and replaced them with Arabs.

But war in Iraq could cause this forced demographic change to unravel quickly, according to Kurdish and Arab villagers. For in establishing a new home for Arabs, Mr. Hussein's program also created a patchwork of grudges and grievances. American forces could quickly find themselves in the center of a sea of fleeing Arabs, vengeful Kurds and countless disputes over homes, land and lucrative oil fields.

In Kirkuk, Mr. Hussein forcibly expelled an estimated 100,000 Kurds to cement Arab control, according to Kurdish officials. In the countryside around Kirkuk and Mosul, he bulldozed hundreds of Kurdish villages and built Arab villages on the ruins.

The wounds caused by those actions are especially deep for the Kurds, who have long claimed part of Mosul and all of Kirkuk, a city they hail as their Jerusalem. But the region has an even more complex history: Turkey has claims to the area, which was part of the Ottoman Empire.

Today, Kirkuk produces roughly one-third of Iraq's oil, and in a war American forces are expected to try to seize control of its fields quickly, both to help stabilize world oil prices and stave off a race for Kirkuk between Turkish and Kurdish forces. Turkey fears that if Iraqi Kurds controlled the fields, and the revenue from them, they could try to create a Kurdish state that would include much of southeastern Turkey.

Kurdish officials say they have promised American officials that they will not send their troops into Kirkuk and Mosul, but unarmed civilians will be free to go.

''We will not prevent anyone to go back to their homes and land,'' said Karim Senjari, the interior minister of the western half of the Kurdish enclave. ''It's their right to go back to their place of origin.''

The Arab farmer and his seemingly bucolic village, a prosperous hamlet of 80 families known as Pirbub, illustrate how land disputes could quickly erupt. Unlike the deserts of southern Iraq, Mosul and Kirkuk sit in a plain of farmland that extends to the foothills of mountains to the north and east.

Pirbub was built on top of the bulldozed homes of Kurds in the late 1970's. Today, some of those Kurds live only 200 yards away, just over the dividing line between government controlled and Kurdish controlled northern Iraq.

The divider, in fact, is a stream so narrow that the two sides could toss a football back and forth, if they wanted. Near one end of the 100-yard-long metal bridge that separates the two sides, the white, red, black and green Iraqi flag flies. At the other, the yellow flag of the Kurdish Democratic Party flutters.

In interviews, some Arabs and Kurds from both sides said they would settle their differences peacefully.

Dozens of Arabs and Kurds cross the bridge each day to trade or travel to nearby cities, they pointed out. And the area is a smuggling hub, with Arabs hauling thousands of gallons of gasoline into Kurdish territory.

Yet some Kurds made it clear what they expected from Arabs if American bombs began to fall. Mohammed Taheer Tato, mayor of the Kurdish village here, vowed to seize control of Pirbub and all Arab villages created by Mr. Hussein on Kurdish land.

''If they leave, we won't do any harm to them,'' Mr. Tato said, as the Kurdish men clustered around him nodded. ''But if they won't, we are obliged to attack them.''

Interviews with eight Arab men who crossed the bridge on routine errands and asked not to be identified produced contradictory answers. Some men at first vowed to never leave the village, but then took their comments back. Others suggested they were only pawns in a larger game.

''What can we do when the American Army comes?'' asked one Arab man. ''We are living in our land and our houses. It has nothing to do with us.''

But Kurds accused the Arabs of taking advantage of their suffering. They also said members of Iraq's Baath Party were arming Arab villagers and urging them to fight.

Arabs scoffed at that notion and said most people were preoccupied with surviving a war and its aftermath.

Most said they would leave before the Kurds returned to the area. Only the defiant 31-year-old farmer insisted he would stay.

If war comes, ''We will pray to God,'' he said. ''We will just pray.''
