

U.N. Broadens List of Products Iraq Can Import
By Somini Sengupta
May 15, 2002

The Security Council unanimously approved a resolution today overhauling its economic sanctions against Iraq, with the goal of dampening their impact on civilians while keeping pressure on Saddam Hussein.

The new measure, passed 15 to 0, will allow far more consumer goods -- from bicycles to sewing machines -- to enter Iraq, even as it continues to block items that could be used for military purposes, like high-speed computers. It represents the most radical redrawing of the sanctions since 1996, when Baghdad was allowed to trade oil for food.

Though the resolution appears to ease the sanctions imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, it was seen as a significant victory for the United States and its allies on the Council.

The resolution was intended to blunt any drive to end the sanctions altogether and to deflate criticism that the measures are hurting ordinary Iraqis more than their leader. It also seemed part of the diplomatic groundwork the Bush administration is seeking to lay as it presses its case that Mr. Hussein should be removed from power, perhaps by force.

''The focused controls on military-relevant goods and simplified procedures for civilian goods eliminates excuses for inaction or evasion of U.N. sanctions on Iraq,'' the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said today.

The new sanctions system takes effect in July, and would have to be renewed in six months. The sanctions are to stay in place until United Nations weapons inspectors can verify that Iraq has met the obligations it agreed to after its defeat in the Persian Gulf war to dismantle programs to develop weapons of mass destruction. In its war against terrorism, the Bush administration has cited Iraq's chemical, nuclear and biological weapons programs as a prime threat.

Iraqi officials, perhaps looking to stave off American action, have in recent months discussed with Secretary General Kofi Annan the possibility of reopening the country to inspections. The last inspectors left Iraq in December 1998, on the eve of four nights of American and British airstrikes after repeated standoffs with Iraqi officials.

Washington's European allies on the Council applauded the resolution, saying it puts the onus on the Iraqi government to spend its oil revenues wisely and to meet its obligations.

''It removes Saddam's spurious excuses for the suffering he inflicts on the Iraqi people and puts more pressure on the regime,'' the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, said in a statement.

Acknowledging the mounting threats against Iraq, its ally and neighbor Syria, which currently holds a rotating seat on the Council, had pushed for language in the resolution to recognize Iraq's right to defend itself. The Syrian proposals were rejected earlier this week.

But the Syrian delegate to the United Nations, Mikhail Wehbe, insisted today that it was ''high time'' to lift the sanctions against Iraq.

He also used the occasion to criticize the Council for failing to compel Israeli cooperation with a United Nations inquiry into Israel's attack on the Jenin refugee camp last month.

In the end, though, Mr. Wehbe said his country would assent to the resolution to maintain unity on the Security Council and help it ''retrieve its credibility,'' particularly in the Arab world.

Iraq's representative, Mohammed Aldouri, had little to say about the potential impact of the resolution, except that it offered his country little to celebrate. The new system, he said, would erect expensive bureaucratic hurdles to the import of necessary goods.

''I can tell you, my country, we are always unhappy to see these kinds of resolutions coming out of the Security Council,'' he said. ''It will be very costly for Iraq.''

He declined to say whether the resolution would prompt Baghdad to suspend the export of oil, as it did last month in protest against Israeli military action in the West Bank.

At the moment, all exports to Iraq, except food and some medicines, are scrutinized by a sanctions committee of the Security Council. Any member can block such imports, and the United States has used the system to keep more than $5 billion worth of goods from reaching Baghdad.

Under the new system, the sanctions committee will ponder the fate of only those items that figure on a lengthy list of goods that may be used for military purposes. High-speed computers are part of that list -- anything with chips as fast as a Pentium IV, for instance, but not one with a Pentium III.

Certain kinds of communication equipment fall under the 300-page list of ''dual use'' goods as well, but consumer goods like domestic appliances and farm equipment do not.

United Nations officials will be responsible for culling items that fall within the list. Those that do will be forwarded to the sanctions committee, which will have 30 days to decide whether they can be allowed into Iraq.

The resolution was the product of a compromise between the United States and Russia, Iraq's staunchest ally on the Council.

The Russian ambassador, Sergey Lavrov, today praised the resolution as an important tool to restore Iraq's infrastructure, but said his country would continue to push for more. ''It is only through the lifting of the sanctions that Iraq can rebuild its economy,'' he said.
