

A NATION AT WAR: AIRSTRIKES; Aerial Pounding Intended to Push Iraq's Government Toward Brink
By Michael R. Gordon
March 22, 2003

The thunderous airstrikes the United States military carried out tonight were intended to destroy Saddam Hussein's ability to control his forces and to push his government to the brink of collapse.

This is the attack that Pentagon officials have talked about for months: a strike that would be concentrated and devastating. More than 1,300 cruise missiles and bombs were used, and most of the targets were in and around Baghdad.

Inside the war room of the land command center, tonight's targets were marked with red triangles on a classified laptop. The area on the west side of the Tigris River near the Presidential Palace compound and other major power centers was a maze of red.

''That's a bad neighborhood to be in tonight,'' a senior commander said dryly.

As the airstrikes progressed, commanders briefly turned to television sets to see how the red triangles on the target map metamorphosed into explosive flashes. Then they turned their attention back to orchestrating the land war that is to take allied forces to the gates of Baghdad.

Tonight's airstrikes were originally intended to begin the allied offensive and, thus, set the stage for the land campaign, military officials said. But that strategy was reversed after the Bush administration ordered a surprise cruise missile strike Wednesday night to try to kill Mr. Hussein and top aides. Concerned that Iraqi forces would respond by setting the Rumaila oil fields aflame, American commanders accelerated the timetable for the allied land attack.

The Baghdad strikes were carried out by B-2 Spirit bombers, F-117 Nighthawk stealth fighter-bombers, Tomahawk sea-launched cruise missiles and air-launched cruise missiles launched from B-52 bombers. Most of the bombs were 2,000 pounds, some specially designed to penetrate concrete bunkers where Iraqi officials might be trying to hide.

The basic idea of the strikes in Baghdad was to attack command centers and to bomb the forces that help keep Mr. Hussein in power. The targets included Mr. Hussein's palace guard, the headquarters for the Republican Guard, facilities for the Special Republican Guard, whose mission is to protect the government, and organizations charged with internal security, like the Special Security Organization.

Many of the strikes also hit the telephone lines and communications centers that Iraq uses to operate its air defenses around the capital. Iraqi airfields were also struck.

Air war enthusiasts have long promoted the notion that bombing strikes could be so devastating that the United States might be able to win a victory from the air. But in this war, military officials say, it is more accurate to see a synergy between the air and land offensives.

The airstrikes have interfered with Mr. Hussein's ability to command his far-flung forces and thus helped the allied ground attack, American commanders say. And the rapid allied advance on the ground has demonstrated that the United States sees this as a fight to the finish.

''What this does is open up opportunities to exploit your offensive maneuver,'' said Maj. Gen. J. D Thurman, the chief operations officer at the land command, referring to tonight's airstrikes. ''That allows you to maintain the tempo of the operation. There are resistance pockets all over. This continues to weaken their command and control.''

Airstrikes, however, were also carried out against Iraqi intelligence and security services in Basra and airfields in other parts of Iraq.

Not all of today's airstrikes were successful. Two strikes were carried out to kill Ali Hassan al-Majid, Mr. Hussein's cousin, who is in charge of defense of the southern part of the country. He is known as ''Chemical'' Ali because of his role in overseeing chemical attacks against the Kurds. American military officials said they appeared to result in a near-miss.

For all the thunderous barrages in Baghdad, several hundred strikes were withdrawn from today's strike plan. With American forces advancing on Baghdad and allied officials already working on plans to rebuild the country, American commanders wanted to limit the damage to civilian infrastructure. A major bridge in Baghdad was not struck.

The plan of the land war command, in fact, is to keep up the pressure and the pace of advances. The Marines made an important gain when they completed the seizure of the Rumaila oil field. The United States and Britain are hoping that Iraqi oil exports can help finance the reconstruction of Iraq after Mr. Hussein is gone, and a priority was thwarting any effort to destroy them. Only nine of more than 1,000 oil wells were on fire or damaged.

To the west, the Army V Corps moved to take Tallil air base and seize a bridge over the Euphrates near Nasiriya. Those were important objectives that will aid the thrust toward the Iraqi capital.

As the American ground forces advance, the Iraqi Republican Guard forces that surround the capital will be natural targets for air attacks, strikes that will seek to prevent them from moving into Baghdad and thus into position for urban warfare or heading south to confront American troops. There are no signs that the Republican Guard units are ready to capitulate, as the commander of the Iraqi 51st Regular Army division did today in the south.
