

THREATS AND RESPONSES: STEALTH AND COUNTERSTEALTH; U.S. Suspects Ukraine of Selling Radar to Iraq
By Michael Wines
Sept. 24, 2002

The United States, relying on an analysis of clandestine tape recordings, has concluded that President Leonid D. Kuchma of Ukraine personally approved a plan in July 2000 to sell Iraq an advanced radar system that can detect approaching aircraft without their pilots' knowledge.

Although there is no definitive proof that the sale was made, the American government has ''some indications'' that the radar units are now in Iraq, a high-level United States official said.

The American conclusion concerning the tapes led the government to suspend a $55 million-a-year aid program to Ukraine 10 days ago pending a review of American policy, the official said. Further measures appear likely once that review is completed.

The radar equipment's presence in Iraq, if proven, could lead to more severe punishment under American law and the international arms embargo imposed on Iraq by the United Nations.

''We're looking at a range of things in terms of how we engage Ukraine and how we talk to Kuchma,'' that official said of the policy review. ''We're hopeful that it will come to a conclusion in about a week or so that we can make a recommendation for a White House decision.''

The radar, nicknamed Kolchuga after the Russian word for chain-mail armor, is a passive radar system, differing from conventional radar that bounces its own signal off an object.

The Kolchuga system has a complex of four receivers that pick up and coordinate the position of signals emitted by approaching objects. It is billed as capable of detecting aircraft as far away as 500 miles and ground targets up to 370 miles away.

But its strongest selling point, experts say, is its claimed ability to spot even so-called stealth aircraft without being detected. When Ukraine first exhibited the radar at a Jordan arms show in April 2000, it said the system was the most advanced in the world.

Steven Zaluga, a military technology analyst for the Virginia-based consulting firm Teal Group Corporation, said the ability of such passive systems to spot stealth aircraft was overrated, largely because American stealth fighters and bombers emit few or no signals.

Conventional American attack jets do emit signals from altimeters, strike radar transmitters and other devices, he said. The question, he said, is whether the Kolchuga system is sophisticated enough to sift those signals from the cacophony of ordinary airwaves.

''If it's a high-quality system, it would be of some concern,'' Mr. Zaluga said.

The finding follows a judgment by experts at the Justice Department and elsewhere in the government that a clandestine tape recording -- in which a voice that the United States has concluded is Mr. Kuchma's is heard discussing smuggling the radar system to Iraq -- is authentic and unaltered.

That tape, along with 300 hours of other secretly recorded conversations, was brought to the United States by a onetime Ukrainian presidential security guard, Mykola Melnychenko, who fled his country in 2001. Mr. Melnychenko, an anti-Kuchma campaigner who is a refugee in the United States, gave the original tape to the United States for testing this summer.

The American finding has been relayed to NATO members and to Ukrainian officials, whose response ''is mostly a denial that this has happened,'' the American official said.

In the last five years Ukraine has become the world's sixth-largest arms supplier.

The tape recording is said to document a conversation between Mr. Kuchma and Valery Malev, then the director of Ukraine's arms export agency, Ukrspetsexport.

According to a public transcript released by the Washington-based Center for Public Integrity, which Mr. Melnychenko says is accurate, Mr. Malev told Mr. Kuchma: ''We were approached by Iraq through our Jordanian intermediary. They want to buy four Kolchuga stations and offer $100 million up front.''

Mr. Malev suggested that the system be packed in the crates of another Ukrainian company, Kraz, and that Ukrainians with forged passports be sent to Iraq to oversee its installation.

''Just watch that the Jordanian keeps his mouth shut,'' Mr. Kuchma replied.

''Who is going to detect it?'' Mr. Malev replied. ''We don't sell much to them, I mean to Jordan.'' Mr. Kuchma then answered: ''O.K. Go ahead.''

That apparent go-ahead -- on July 10, 2000 -- came barely five weeks after President Clinton visited Kiev and offered a badly needed show of support for Mr. Kuchma's leadership.

American officials consider the verification of the recording cause enough to temporarily suspend the $55 million in aid given Ukraine under the Freedom Support Act, which finances pro-democracy and economic reform programs in former Soviet states.

Because that aid is intended to promote Western values, much of it can be restored after Washington completes its review of its policy toward Ukraine.

Other crucial assistance -- for example, aid handed out to help Ukraine dismantle its Soviet-era nuclear programs -- is unaffected by the suspension.

In the longer term, the United States will face the question of how to deal with Mr. Kuchma without damaging Ukraine, a nation of 50 million that is a strategic crossroads between Europe and Asia.

American ties with Mr. Kuchma have been fraying steadily for a year and a half as his presidency has been marked by corruption scandals and growing authoritarianism.
