

France Mutes Its Criticism Of U.S. Stance Toward Iraq
By Elaine Sciolino
Aug. 29, 2002

The new center-right French government has decided to stop criticizing American war planning against Saddam Hussein and instead maximize its leverage with the United States by stressing areas of agreement, according to senior French officials.

Under the previous center-left government, French-American relations were often poisonous, characterized by repeated spats over issues ranging from perceived American unilateralism to policy in the Middle East.

The decision reflects an important tactical shift. Its proponents, including the new foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, argue that a more conciliatory policy will avoid needless friction between the two longtime allies and allow the government of President Jacques Chirac to keep open its options in case the United States decides to wage war unilaterally against Iraq.

The move may also help protect France's national interests in Iraq, including its oil trade, should the United States wage war and win, the officials said.

The tonal shift does not mean that France has suddenly embraced the American position that a military campaign to oust President Saddam Hussein of Iraq from power is justifiable and perhaps necessary.

Rather, Mr. Chirac and Mr. de Villepin have come to the conclusion that it is wiser to present France as an active, strategic partner of the United States and to keep quiet about specific policy differences.

''More and more at the highest levels people are saying, 'We don't like a military operation but there's likely to be one so what do we do,' '' a senior French official said. ''So the goal is to keep all our options open and not criticize, not to provoke a backlash. We feel that Washington is expecting us to react negatively and we have decided not to. It's a tactical choice.''

Another senior official put it more bluntly, ''We're driving the Pentagon crazy by keeping silent.''

The French shift leaves France and Germany in uncharacteristic positions. Germany, normally the most pliant of allies, has said it will not participate in an American ''adventure'' in Iraq. This tone has played well for Chancellor Gerhard Schröder as he campaigns for re-election next month. Meanwhile France, normally the most combative of allies, has been restrained.

French officials seem to be relieved, even amused, that it is now the Germans who have taken the lead in taking on the Bush administration for its Iraq policy

On Tuesday, Mr. Schröder described Washington's course as a ''mistake'' that undermines United Nations efforts to resume weapons inspections in Iraq. He has also said a war could wreck the international antiterror coalition, inflame the Middle East and hurt the world economy.

The French attitude towards the United States was reflected in a speech by Mr. Villepin that opened a conference of French ambassadors at the Foreign Ministry on Tuesday.

Unlike his predecessor, Hubert Védrine, who seemed to relish any opportunity to criticize the United States, Mr. de Villepin, who lived and worked for years in Washington, stressed the positive. He spoke glowingly of American ''dynamism, energy and exceptional enthusiasm,'' and the need for the United States and Europe to unite in a ''new Euro-Atlantic partnership.''

As for Iraq, he branded it a regime that ''defies international rules set by the Security Council, holds it people hostage and threatens security, particularly that of its neighbors. Such behavior is not acceptable. We Europeans, know too well the price of weakness in the face of dictatorship if we close our eyes and play a passive game.''

The emerging French strategy is to take diplomatic cover by putting any talk of war in the context of the rule of international law. Indeed, in his speech, Mr. de Villepin said that the international community must demand the unconditional return of United Nations inspectors to the country, but did not say what should be the response if Iraq refused. As for waging war, he reiterated the French position that ''no military action can be conducted without a decision of the Security Council.''

In his speech, Mr. de Villepin did not say, as other French officials have said privately, that the Iraq problem can only be dealt with after the war between Israel and the Palestinians is resolved.

The passage on Iraq was carefully negotiated for hours inside the Foreign Ministry and with the Élysée Palace. It will be reiterated by Mr. Chirac when he delivers a speech to the ambassadors at the Élysée Palace on Thursday, according to Catherine Colonna, Mr. Chirac's spokesman.

''For the moment, the most useful position is to remind people of the obligations of Iraq and the role of the Security Council,'' Ms. Colonna said.

Last evening, in a meeting with ambassadors assigned to the Middle East, Mr. Villepin was peppered with questions that underscore the delicacy of France's position. ''It was a real brainstorming and shows how things are too hypothetical now to take a stand,'' one participant said. ''People were asking, 'What do we do if the Americans come up with a U.N. resolution and we don't accept it? Do we take part in the drafting? Do we vote for it? If we vote for it, do we send troops?' ''

According to his aides, Mr. Villepin simply listened.
