

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 28, 2003; Baghdad Bombing, A Northern Victory and Differing Accounts of the War
By Anthony Depalma
March 29, 2003

Heavy bombs struck Baghdad again, and a marketplace was destroyed, although American officials denied responsibility. Allied warplanes pounded Republican Guard positions on the outskirts of the Iraqi capital. As allied ground troops regrouped, American officials in Washington tried to defend their handling of the war and to quell internal disagreements among military leaders. A huge explosion shook Kuwait City, ripping apart a waterfront shopping mall and setting nerves on edge.

MORE SHELLING -- A thunderous bombardment by American warplanes shook the heart of Baghdad, battering two principal telephone exchanges and the Ministry of Information. An explosion tore through a marketplace in the city's impoverished northwest suburbs, killing dozens. Iraqi officials said it was a bomb dropped by allied jets, but American officials said they had no initial evidence that an American bomb had hit the market.

Outside Baghdad, as American forces on the ground took a brief pause, the bombing of the Republican Guard continued in preparation for the eventual assault on the city in the days or weeks ahead.

Across the border in Kuwait, an early morning blast broke windows and collapsed part of a shopping mall located in a sensitive area of Kuwait City, not far from the palace of the ruling emir. The mall was closed and no one was reported hurt. Kuwaiti officials told reporters it appeared that an American cruise missile had gone off course. American officials said they had no information about a cruise missle misfiring.

WARNING FROM RUMSFELD -- Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld accused Saddam Hussein of operating death squads, and he warned Syria and Iran to stay out of the conflict with Iraq or face serious consequences. Mr. Rumsfeld accused Syria of providing Mr. Hussein's forces with Russian-made night-vision goggles, and he warned Iran not to allow several hundred Iraqi fighters trained in Iran to cross the border into Iraq. Mr. Rumsfeld's comments were the first suggestion from anyone in the Bush administration that the conflict in Iraq could spill over to other states.

AMERICAN BODIES FOUND -- The remains of four American soldiers were found by marines in a shallow grave in the town of Nasiriya, near the Euphrates River in southern Iraq. Pentagon officials said they believe that the four were executed by Iraqi paramilitary forces after they were seized in an ambush on Sunday. The officials declined to speculate as to whether the four were among those who were shown alive by Al Jazeera television last weekend. The military had heard reports that the Iraqis had executed the soldiers after they were shown on the Arab network, but there had been no confirmation of that.

NORTHERN VICTORY -- A Special Forces engagement in the north exceeded expectations. A combined American and Kurdish assault easily overcame the stronghold of a militant Islamic group in northern Iraq. About 100 American Special Forces coordinated the attack by the Kurdish pesh merga fighters and routed the Ansar al-Islam, a group that United States officials say receives support from both Baghdad and Al Qaeda, although that information has not been independently verified.

AID ARRIVES -- After several delays, a British supply ship, the Sir Galahad, docked at the port of Umm Qasr and began to unload food, water and medicine. Iraqis in the city, which is now controlled by British troops, received the supplies cooly. American aid officials said there was no immediate crisis in Umm Qasr because the city had sufficient food for a few months. But in nearby Safwan, mobs attacked a second convoy of supply trucks sent by the Kuwaiti Red Crescent Society, repeating the chaos seen when the first convoy arrived earlier in the week.

In Basra, where the shortage of water and food is a near crisis, no supplies could be delivered because allied forces have not yet gained control. Iraqi forces fired on a group of residents who desperately tried to flee the city.

At the United Nations, the Security Council unanimously approved a resolution resuming the oil-for-food program for Iraq that was suspended on the eve of war.

MARINES HALT -- At least one of the American columns bearing down on Baghdad halted its advance to allow time to shore up its supply line and to take what is known as an ''operational pause,'' or a pit stop, on the way to a final battle at Baghdad. After driving 200 miles into Iraq over the past week, Marine officers ordered troops and vehicles to stop at a point about 100 miles south of Baghdad and catch their breath.

ANTIWAR STRATEGY -- A week after demonstrators blocked roads in Atlanta, Chicago and other cities to protest the war against Iraq, one of the largest antiwar groups has decided to take a different tack, abandoning such disruptive tactics to focus instead on getting its message across to the federal government, big corporations and media conglomerates.

One group, called Win Without War, is calling for followers to condemn the war but embrace the troops and is encouraging the two million people on its mailing list to send supportive letters to soldiers fighting in Iraq. ANTHONY DePALMA
