

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE EXILES; Iraqi Opposition Groups Quarrel Over Conference
By James Dao
Nov. 7, 2002

A new dispute among Iraq's fractious opposition groups is jeopardizing plans for a major conference in Brussels this month that the Bush administration had hoped would showcase an emerging unity among the opponents of President Saddam Hussein.

Though the dispute has focused on details of the proposed Nov. 22 conference, it has exposed the groups' ideological differences and deep mistrust of each other. Each side has accused the others of trying to use the conference to gain control of a post-Hussein Iraqi government.

The opposition groups have not held a unity conference since 1997, and the Bush administration has been encouraging them for several months to resolve their longstanding differences and lay the groundwork for the creation of an interim government should Mr. Hussein be deposed.

But the latest dispute has raised new questions about whether the groups can ever work together and underscored the pitfalls of trying to create an alternative Iraqi government before Mr. Hussein is ousted -- a goal some administration officials have advocated.

''Trying to baptize someone as the new leadership of Iraq before an invasion takes place is just not a good idea,'' said Patrick Clawson, deputy director for the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ''It's a fantasy to think there will be that kind of unity.''

The fight pits the Iraqi National Congress, a London-based umbrella group that has strong support within the Pentagon and White House, against four other organizations that represent Kurds, Shiite Muslims and former Iraqi military officers.

Officials of the Iraqi National Congress are threatening to boycott the Nov. 22 conference on the grounds that the organizers are attempting to limit participation to Iraqis who are active in existing political parties. Congress officials contend the conference should be opened up to a larger number of unaffiliated exiles.

They have also argued that the conference's agenda is too limited, and should include plans to create an interim national assembly that could form the core of a national legislature after Mr. Hussein is removed. The existing agenda calls only for establishing a committee to study creation of an interim government.

''The agenda they want to discuss is basically to go to the conference, applaud each other and then form a coordination committee,'' said Nabil Musawi, who represents the Iraqi National Congress on the committee organizing the Brussels event.

''That is a very lame outcome for such a critical period,'' he said. ''We should be ready to fill the power vacuum, ready with a clear plan and a group of people who know what to do, how to run a government, selected on the basis of their professionalism.''

But officials of other groups contend that the Iraqi National Congress and its leader, Ahmad Chalabi, are trying to stack the conference membership with their backers in hopes of creating a provisional government with Mr. Chalabi as its head.

''Chalabi feels he is not being given a leadership role in this conference,'' said a senior official with one of the opposition groups. ''They know that after this conference the I.N.C. will no longer be the main umbrella group for the opposition. And he wants the I.N.C. to remain the leadership of all the opposition.''

The other groups include the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan; the Kurdistan Democratic Party; the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a Teheran-based group representing Shiites; and Iraqi National Accord, composed of defectors from the Iraqi military and security services.

A sixth major group, the Constitutional Monarch Movement, which represents members of Iraq's former royal family, is also considering boycotting the conference.

The opposition groups' dispute mirrors a corresponding rift within the Bush administration over how to cultivate a Western-leaning government in Iraq if Mr. Hussein is ousted.

Many Pentagon officials support the Iraqi National Congress's ambitions to create a provisional government that could form the nucleus of a new government in Baghdad once Mr. Hussein falls.

But that proposal is strongly opposed by the State Department, where many officials support cultivating grass-roots leaders inside Iraq through local elections and the writing of a new constitution.

The State Department's opposition to a provisional government has infuriated the Iraqi National Congress, which has attempted to enlist its supporters to bombard the department with protest calls and e-mails.

''The State Department is one of the major reasons for this mess,'' said Entifadh K. Qanbar, the director of the Iraqi National Congress's Washington office.

A State Department official said the department was attempting to mediate the dispute to prevent the Iraqi National Conference from holding a separate conference that could completely splinter the opposition movement. But he said the department remained opposed to a provisional government.

Despite the rancor of the dispute, some analysts said it was part of the democratic process for the groups to thrash out their differences.

''The impression that's created is that the Iraqi opposition are not ready for prime time,'' said David L. Phillips, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations who maintains close ties to many of the opposition groups. ''But I'm confident they are going to set aside their differences and come up with a common strategy.''
