

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD/NORTHERN IRAQ; Chemical-Warfare School Is Found in Iraqi Barracks
By David Rohde
March 29, 2003

Khalil Ismail, an Iraqi soldier, completed his ''chemical alert'' course on Feb. 16, 2002, according to a handwritten evaluation form found in an office here today. His instructor, Muhammad Wahabi, had no negative comments about his students, described as ''all members of infantry brigade,''and he was effusive about his pupils' ability to perform a crucial task.

''The fighters have shown a quick response,'' the instructor wrote, ''to putting on their gas masks in the required time.''

The course evaluation was found today in the abandoned headquarters of the Iraqi Army's Eighth Infantry Division Chemical Warfare Unit, outside the city of Kirkuk in northern Iraq.

Gas masks, chemical weapons decontamination kits and detailed instructions on how to use chemical weapons protective suits were found at the site, which appeared to be a training center.

No evidence of instruction in the use chemical agents as offensive weapons was found in an hourlong search of the complex.

The course work appeared similar to what American and NATO soldiers are taught about the use of chemical suits and gas masks as protective equipment.

Iraqi soldiers abandoned the building -- part of a dilapidated Iraqi Army barracks here -- on Thursday after several days of intensive American bombing of Iraqi positions.

In one building, a chart titled ''the duty and function of chemical equipment'' listed a military unit's inventory of 148 gas masks, 100 sterilization kits and 90 protective boots. A few inches away, a chart listed emergency radio codes to be used in the event of chemical or nuclear attack.

The discovery of the barracks came as Kurdish fighters explored perhaps a dozen miles of territory abandoned by the Iraqi Army. A tour of the area today suggested that the sudden pullback, which occurred after no ground attack by Kurdish or American forces, was an organized withdrawal and not a headlong retreat.

Rifles, trucks, munitions, equipment, papers, uniforms, food and thousands of other items all appeared to have been systematically removed from the complex of crude cinder block buildings by Iraqi forces before they left.

At dusk today, Iraqi forces fired at least four rockets into the trenches they had just abandoned and into the Kurdish-controlled town of Chamchamal.

Sadia Kareem, whose 11-year-old son, Ahmed, was wounded in the head by a rocket, said the surge of joy she felt from the Iraqi withdrawal had quickly ebbed.

''When the Iraqi Army retreated, I was happy,'' said Ms. Kareem, who had lived under Iraqi gunners for the last 12 years. ''Always his effect is present. Now he bombs us.''

The local Kurdish commander, Rostam Homed Rahim, said that Iraqi soldiers remained in the position they took up on Thursday just outside Kirkuk, an oil-rich city that is a strategic prize in northern Iraq. Regular army troops are guarding the approach to the city, he said, and Republican Guard forces remain in place south of Kirkuk.

Mr. Rahim said the Iraqis may have pulled out of the dozens of fortified bunkers, trenches and artillery positions they built along mile after mile of the main road for military reasons. He said Iraqi forces may believe that positioning themselves in and around the city will protect them from American bombing, but added that they were mistaken.

''Probably they will plan for urban warfare,'' he said. ''They will not be able to defend themselves.''

The barracks offered a glimpse into the lives of Iraqi soldiers and a world of indoctrination. Slogans hailing Saddam Hussein blanketed most buildings. One exhortation said: ''Distrust your friend before your enemy.''

Another reflected total obedience: ''Yes, yes for President Saddam Hussein,'' it said. ''And death for America and Zionism.''

The tentacles of Mr. Hussein's spying apparatus could also be seen. Offices in a building up the hill from the chemical warfare headquarters labeled Fourth Division Headquarters had a chart titled eavesdropping center, with blank spaces for soldiers working ''morning, evening and night.''

In a destroyed Iraqi frontline bunker, an inscription written on one wall read: ''The intelligence are the eyes of the nation.''

Amid ominous references to some of the most terrifying forms of modern warfare and ceaseless surveillance were signs that Iraq's regular army is a ramshackle force.

The basewas made of dozens of small, crumbling one-story buildings.White paint peeled from cinder walls. Slapdash electrical wiring hung from ceilings and ran across floors. Bricks had been crammed into windows, apparently for protection against American bombs.

There were also human touches. All around the base were scores of small rooms where soldiers had bunked. Pots for making tea sat ready for use. Rooms reeked of the kerosene heaters soldiers crouched over only 48 hours earlier. In one hallway, a pair of empty combat boots, some crumpled packs of cigarettes and a dozen orange peels made it seem as if Iraqi soldiers had just stepped away for a moment and would soon return.

Back in the chemical warfare unit headquarters, a detailed 10-foot by 15-foot scale model of the area, replete with rolling hills and green farmland, filled one corner of a large room. Lists describing officers' responsibilities were painted on the walls in white and red paint.
