

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 26, 2003; A Thrust by Iraqi Armor, a Northern Front Opened, and Civilian Casualties
By Anthony Depalma
March 27, 2003

A major force of American soldiers parachuted into northern Iraq to open a second, northern, front. But as the battle for Baghdad neared, the killing of civilians in a pair of bomb blasts brought more calls for a cease-fire.

PARATROOPERS IN NORTHERN IRAQ -- More than 1,000 paratroopers from the 173rd Airborne Brigade dropped onto a military airfield in northern Iraq, officials said. They will pave the way for opening a northern front, preventing Saddam Hussein from throwing more of his forces against allied troops in the south. Republican Guard forces set out from Baghdad in unknown numbers possibly in preparation for a confrontation with American forces. Officials said reports of a huge column of Iraqi vehicles racing south from Baghdad were incorrect. Analysts believe Mr. Hussein is desperate for a battlefield victory that could be used to sue for a cease-fire.

Leaders in the Middle East and Europe called for a cease-fire and, at the United Nations, Secretary General Kofi Annan denounced the civilian losses in the war zone and the shortages of food and water in the southern city of Basra.

The Pentagon announced that an additional 21,000 troops, from the Fourth Infantry Division, originally headed for Turkey, would be deployed in Iraq.

A major battle continued in the central Iraqi city of Najaf, where about 1,000 Iraqi soldiers have been killed, American officials said. So far, only one American soldier, a member of a tank crew, has been reported killed in the battle.

BOMBS IN BAGHDAD -- Officials have said it was all but inevitable that Iraqi civilians would eventually be killed. Now it has happened, though responsibility for the two blasts that killed 17 people and wounded 45 others is far from clear. Iraqi officials took Western reporters by bus to the site of the explosions along a road leading from Baghdad north to Kirkuk. Iraq blamed American forces, but military officials in the United States said they could not be sure that a missile fired by allied troops had done the damage. Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks suggested it also was possible that an Iraqi soldier, loyal to Saddam Hussein, had planted the bombs to whip up anger toward the United States.

BUSH ADDRESSES TROOPS -- Before meeting with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, President Bush left Washington for a brief visit to MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla., home of the United States Central Command. Mr. Bush thanked the troops and tried to rally spirits about a war that he said would last longer than many Americans might have expected. ''Our military is making good progress in Iraq, yet this war is far from over,'' Mr. Bush said. In a last-minute change to his speech, the president left out a few key words. According to the prepared text, the president was to have said that the progress of the military effort in Iraq was ''ahead of schedule.'' An administration official said the president was simply being cautious.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was anything but cautious when he made an appearance on a television show and responded to criticism that the American force in Iraq was too small.

''That's nonsense,'' Mr. Powell said. What is important, said Mr. Powell, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is recognizing that British, American and Australian forces drove 300 miles into Iraq in five days. ''That is a heck of an achievement,'' he said.

THE FIRST AID -- The first delivery of aid to Iraq -- five trucks loaded with 20 tons of food and water -- crossed the border from Kuwait to the small Iraqi town of Safwan. Residents of the town swarmed over the trucks, which had been sent by the Kuwaiti Red Crescent, grabbing at the boxes, tearing them apart and fighting over the food they contained. The American military drove another convoy of seven supply trucks from Kuwait to the outskirts of Umm Qasr, a southern port city that has seen sustained fighting over the last few days.

PERCEPTIONS ABROAD AND AT HOME -- A week into the war, protests and demonstrations against the American-led invasion of Iraq continue in many countries, and the public mood reflected in the local news media shows signs of turning sarcastic and angry. Antiwar groups in Japan, Italy and other countries are trying to organize boycotts of American products to protest the use of force. But at the same time, support for the United States war effort has been openly expressed in many countries, including Italy, where the newspaper Il Foglio came out in favor of a U.S.A. Day demonstration to counter antiwar protesters.

A similar mix of support and opposition prevails in the United States. Polls show steady support for President Bush's war plans, but across the country many Americans are feeling less confident about the outcome. As American troops enter battles with Iraqi troops and paramilitary units, some Americans who had mixed feelings about the war have started to tune out television coverage, finding it too emotionally wrenching to keep watching. ANTHONY DePALMA
