

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ'S DEFENDERS; A Spiffy Army of Volunteers Parades in Praise of Hussein
By Neil MacFarquhar
Jan. 8, 2003

The buildup of American forces in the Persian Gulf prompted a short, flamboyant rejoinder today from Iraq, where a volunteer army staged a parade to emphasize preparations by Iraqis to defend their cities and towns.

Thousands of men and women who had just completed basic military training marched through this provincial capital for more than an hour. They were members of the Diyala Province branch of the Jerusalem Army, formed two years ago as part of a nationwide force of mostly Baath Party cadres meant to display solidarity with the Palestinians.

''With our enemies escalating by mobilizing their forces and troops, we are doing the same thing, to be ready to defeat any hostile attack,'' said Abdel Baqi al-Sadoun, the chief of the Baath Party in the province. A small gold pin emblazoned with the bust of Saddam Hussein glittered on his military uniform above his heart.

''If anyone is tempted to do anything evil, the answer will not come in slogans or words, but through the huge numbers of volunteers like the ones in this parade,'' he said.


The parade here, 40 miles northeast of Baghdad, came a day after a similarly bellicose speech by President Hussein, in which he denounced United Nations arms inspectors as spies and warned that Iraq was ready for any sacrifices. That the parade was watched by Izzat Ibrahim, a vice president who is formally ranked as the most powerful man in Iraq after Mr. Hussein, seemed to accent that message.

There is no telling unless the shooting starts just how zealous any such force would prove. Members of a similar Popular Army -- and there have been several throughout Mr. Hussein's military campaigns -- surrendered in droves when American-led troops entered Iraq during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Privately, some Iraqis say they plan to sit out any war at home, hoping the electricity and water supplies remain intact. Publicly, most comments echo those from members of the Jerusalem Army, vociferous in their praise of President Hussein and their desire to defend Iraq.

But even a small number of determined fighters taking up arms in their houses could prove nettlesome to any force trying to take over Iraq.

''We are ready to use it, we are ready at any time,'' said an English teacher named Tamim Ali, brandishing the Kalashnikov she carried in the parade. ''If it is our enemy, we should kill him.''

Mrs. Ali, 30, said her four months of military training, eight hours a day, included target shooting, cooking large meals for an army and first aid. She was dressed in a long pea-green tunic and green skirt with a matching head scarf, and wore a white sash with green lettering reading, ''At your service, oh Saddam!''

Women in units of about 100, each with a different uniform, gave the entire first half of the parade the feel of ''The Barbie Collection Meets Lady Muslim Holy Warrior.''

Marching behind signs bearing names like ''Fighters of the Diyala Leadership Group for Women,'' some women wore long khaki skirts, some fatigues. One group had a smattering of women in black headscarves, black fishnet veils over the lower half of their faces and black-and-white checkered Palestinian kaffiyehs thrown over their shoulders. Another wore hats designed to look like the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem. Yet another were hooded in black, symbolic of suicide bombers.

All the women toted Kalashnikovs and proved particularly zealous marchers.

Behind the women came thousands of men, many of whom seemed a little too gray haired and paunchy to put up much of a fight. But they insisted they would. ''We have learned to defend against an attack from our enemy,'' said Safar Abdul Wahab, a 30-year-old farmer who said he had trained six hours daily for three months.

Much of the training was in street fighting, he said, where the emphasis was on ''not retreating while defending our important institutions and facilities.''

On the way to Baquba, three gleaming white United Nations Bell-212 helicopters, trailed by two larger Iraqi ones, crossed the highway high overhead, heading west. They were the first used by weapons inspectors, and are expected to provide both speed and an element of surprise for United Nations teams throughout Iraq.

Reporters on one of the Iraqi helicopters said the element of surprise seemed relative. One hour into the two-hour flight, the Iraqis already knew the destination: a state-run phosphate company at Al Qaim, near the Syrian border, 240 miles northwest of Baghdad.

The Iraqis said all uranium processing facilities at the sprawling complex were either destroyed during the gulf war or dismantled by the United Nations afterward. There have been lingering suspicions in the West, however, that the company may be processing uranium oxide for use in nuclear weapons development.

The six-hour inspection today was carried out by a chemical weapons team that a United Nations spokesman, Hiro Ueki, said was looking for something specific to chemical weapons. He would not elaborate. Riyad Aziz Gassim, the assistant director general at the plant, said it produces only chemical fertilizers.
