

THREATS AND RESPONSES: CONGRESS; Senate Republicans Back Bush's Iraq Policy, as Democrats Call It Rash and Bullying
By Carl Hulse
March 8, 2003

Senate Republicans rallied behind President Bush and his policy on Iraq today, saying they fully supported his intent to disarm Saddam Hussein forcibly with or without new United Nations backing should Mr. Hussein not do so on his own.

''We are fast approaching the moment of reckoning with Saddam Hussein,'' said Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the majority leader, as the Senate concluded more than three hours of partisan parrying over Mr. Bush's policy toward Iraq. ''If he were to voluntarily disarm, it would be welcome, but he will not.''

Senators Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut and Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, both Democrats, sharply challenged the Republican view that was offered in a series of speeches on the floor, saying that the United Nations weapons inspections were producing results and that diplomacy could yet bring about a peaceful resolution of the crisis.

''That is my plea here this afternoon, that we all give this a bit more time,'' said Mr. Dodd, who joined with Mr. Kennedy in arguing that the administration policy was damaging important strategic alliances.

''We cannot be a bully in the world schoolyard and expect cooperation, support from the rest of the world,'' said Mr. Kennedy, who suggested that the Bush administration had adopted a ''chip on the shoulder, my way or the highway policy.''

Republicans countered that Iraq had had years to comply with United Nations calls to give up its illegal weapons, and raised historical allusions, recounting European appeasement of Hitler before World War II.

''I fear the same consequences now,'' said Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, who commended Mr. Bush for ''not flinching, not blinking.''

Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire, said the country should heed George Washington's warning against too deeply entangling the nation's interests with those of Europe, where France, Germany and Russia are among those resisting the Bush policy.

''Our purpose must be in our national security and the security of our people,'' Mr. Gregg said. ''It was not of course Berlin or France or Paris that was attacked. It was New York City.''

The speeches were a response to Mr. Bush's news conference on Thursday night during which he portrayed Iraq's possession of weapons of mass destruction as a direct threat to the United States.

Lawmakers also sense military action is near. But there is no legislative question on Iraq pending before Congress, which last year gave Mr. Bush authorization to take military action against Iraq.

In an appearance before a business group in Findlay, Ohio, Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, Republican of Illinois, predicted that ''we'll be in a situation of war within a couple of weeks.'' According to an Associated Press account of the remarks, Mr. Hastert cautioned that the timetable was only his estimation and ''that's not official and certainly not the White House's position.''

In her own speech to the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, maintained strong opposition to conflict with Iraq at this time. But Representative Martin Frost of Texas, a colleague who briefly challenged her last year for the leadership post, said today that it was time for the nation to begin coming together on Iraq.

''As we move forward, I hope that our leaders -- both in Congress and the administration -- speak with one voice so that our allies and our foes around the world understand the resolve of the American people,'' Mr. Frost said.

The divisions between the parties remained clear in the Senate today. Using time set aside to give their views on Iraq, more than a half-dozen Republicans endorsed the Bush policy after Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Senate Democratic leader, joined with Ms. Pelosi on Thursday to say that any attack on Iraq was premature and that more international support was needed.

''I agree with the president,'' said Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska. ''We don't need partners on this one.''

Mr. Stevens went on to say that ''we have right on our side and we have might on our side and should use that might for the best interest of the world in the future.''

Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, dismissed criticism that Iraq did not pose an imminent threat. ''Imminence becomes murkier in the era of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction,'' he said.

But Senators Kennedy and Dodd called for restraint. Just because American troops were massed in the Persian Gulf, they said, did not mean that the nation would lose international credibility if they were not used. Mr. Dodd said soldiers ''know that there may be times they are going to be asked to wait.''

Despite the political divide, Mr. Warner said Congress would quickly unite should a war begin.

''The history of our nation has shown where there have been differences of views prior to conflict -- and that is good for America, I am not suggesting that shouldn't be the case -- that once our forces are engaged, members give those forces their total support and the commander in chief, the president,'' he said.
