

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Hussein, in a Letter to General Assembly, Says Bush Wants to Control Mideast Oil
By Julia Preston
Sept. 20, 2002

President Saddam Hussein of Iraq accused the Bush administration today of seeking to ''destroy Iraq in order to control the Middle East oil'' and asserted that Mr. Bush had made ''distortions'' to lead Americans to think Iraq had a role in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

Mr. Hussein's comments came in a letter to the General Assembly, excerpts of which were read there today by his foreign minister, Naji Sabri. The Iraqi leader assailed the administration as broadly as Mr. Bush criticized Iraq in the same hall on Sept. 12. Mr. Hussein accused Washington of ''making up problems'' with Baghdad to promote the interests of Israel, which he called ''the Zionist entity.''

Mr. Hussein declared that Iraq is ''clear of all nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.'' But he made no pledges to cooperate with United Nations arms inspectors who are preparing to return to Iraq after a nearly four-year hiatus. Expressing skepticism about their impartiality, the Iraqi leader said only, ''along with you, we are waiting to see.''

That wait should take about a month. Hans Blix, the Swedish arms expert who heads the United Nations chemical and biological weapons team based in New York, said in a press briefing this afternoon that he expected an advance team of inspectors to arrive in Iraq on Oct. 15.

Mr. Hussein's comments, his most extensive to date on the sharpening confrontation with Washington, offered no assurances to the United Nations weapons teams. Instead, Mr. Hussein made a general offer to ''any scientific experts accompanied by politicians you choose to represent any one of your countries'' to come to Iraq to look for weapons. He said Iraq would provide those foreign experts ''all the facilities they need to achieve their objective.''

Mr. Hussein's fierce tone echoed Mr. Bush's, but his sharp words contrasted with the smoother diplomatic language that most other leaders have adopted in eight days of General Assembly speechmaking that ended today. He never spoke of Israel by name, for example, referring only to ''Zionism.''

Mr. Blix briefed the Security Council in a closed meeting about his plans to renew inspections in Iraq, which were suspended in December 1998 when the inspectors were withdrawn in advance of an American and British bombing attack on Baghdad. Afterward, Mr. Hussein refused to allow them to return.

Speaking after the Security Council meeting, Mr. Blix said he had told the Council that Iraqi officials had ''not yet been ready'' to work out logistical details at a meeting he held with them at the United Nations on Tuesday. Mr. Blix reported that the Iraqi officials said they would complete those practical discussions in talks in Vienna from Sept. 30 to Oct. 2.

According to a time line he presented to the Council, Mr. Blix said the advance team's provisional starting date in Iraq was Oct. 15. The full inspection team, including nuclear experts from the International Atomic Energy Agency, would start work about two months later. But the inspections would not become ''fully operational'' until at least 60 days after that, Mr. Blix said.

Then it will take at least four months of inspections before Mr. Blix will report back to the Security Council on Iraq's progress in disarmament -- if Baghdad cooperates fully with the work.

However, Mr. Blix, who has been under pressure from the United States and other Council nations to accelerate the inspections, said he expected to conduct a few test inspections in the first two months after his team arrived, to judge Iraq's disposition toward the United Nations teams. He said Iraq could have ''no sanctuaries'' in its territory from the inspectors.

In the Council meeting, the United States ambassador, John D. Negroponte, said that Iraqi officials seemed to be stalling the start of the inspections. He said the United States would press the Council for a resolution specifying tough consequences if Iraq failed to disarm itself of prohibited weapons.

In his letter read before the Council, Mr. Hussein said the Bush administration was planning an attack against Iraq in order to ''control the politics as well as the oil and economic policies of the whole world.''

''If it succeeded in that, God forbid,'' the Iraqi leader said, ''it would dictate on you what each country needs for its economic development'' by controlling the price and distribution of oil. The Bush administration, he charged, was ''acting on behalf of Zionism, which has been killing the heroic people of Palestine, destroying their property, murdering their children and seeking to impose their domination on the whole world.''

He said the United Nations sanctions program that monitors Iraqi oil sales -- imposed after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 -- was ''tantamount to looting'' and called on the Security Council to lift the sanctions.

Some United Nations officials and many Council diplomats were taken aback by Mr. Hussein's comments. In meetings here over the past days, Mr. Sabri was more conciliatory, leading Council members as well as Arab leaders to believe that Iraq might now have a more open attitude toward the arms inspections.
