

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTELLIGENCE; U.S. Asks Over 60 Nations to Expel Iraqi Envoys
By David E. Sanger
March 10, 2003

The Bush administration has asked more than 60 countries to find and expel several hundred Iraqi diplomats that the C.I.A. and others have identified as suspected intelligence agents, saying they ''pose a threat to our personnel and installations overseas,'' senior administration officials said today.

The administration has begun discussing its request in more detail in recent days as countries have begun to act on the warning. Australia announced today that it was expelling a single Iraqi diplomat, Helal Ibrahim Aaref, after accusing him of spying. He was given four days to leave the country. Australia has been among the strongest supporters of Iraqi disarmament by force, if necessary, and the United States runs a large intelligence-collection site in the center of Australia.

The same intense review of the actions of Iraqi agents around the world resulted in the expulsion last week of two low-level attachés at the Iraqi Mission to the United Nations.

A senior American official said today that the United Nations expulsions were part of the same process of ferreting out suspected Iraqi agents, which he said ''is based on threat information that the U.S. has received.'' He added that it ''has no bearing on the timing of possible military action.''

But officials from several other countries dispute that, saying they had been told by the United States that the administration -- on the advice of American intelligence agencies -- wanted to disrupt the Iraqi intelligence network in the days before any military action.

The United States has set no deadlines, and it is unclear how many of the countries will comply with the request.

By expelling the agents this close to an expected confrontation with Iraq, one official said, Saddam Hussein's government may not have time to replace the agents with others who could help to carry out any attacks that were planned as a response to military action.

''It's a bad time,'' said one American official, ''to be flying around the world with an official Iraqi passport.'' American officials would not name most of the countries involved.

So far there is little evidence of recent terrorist activities linked to Iraqi agents abroad. The Philippines is one recent exception. A cellphone used by a member of the Abu Sayyaf militant Islamic group to call an Iraqi diplomat was later identified as the same telephone used in a failed attempt to set off a bomb in the southern city of Zamboanga.

The diplomat involved was an Iraqi consul, Husham Husain, who was expelled in mid-February after evidence was found that he was called by a member of Abu Sayyaf, a group loosely linked to Al Qaeda, the day after a bomb killed three people last year, including an American soldier.

Six days later, the cellphone of the person who called Mr. Husain was used in the failed attempt to set off a bomb.

President Bush has often praised the Philippine president, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, for help in tracking down terrorists, and she is to be invited for an official visit to Washington in early April that the White House has not yet announced.

There is nothing new about the American pursuit of Iraqi agents: the United States tracked many, and sought the expulsion of some, during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

But the list put together this time seems far more extensive, involving more than 300 diplomats that the United States believes are working undercover. In this case, the likelihood that the Iraqi regime would be overthrown has made it more important, officials say, to find agents who cold attack undefended American targets around the world while the action was focused on Iraq itself.

But there is also another motive: by seizing these Iraqi agents, officials say, there is a likelihood that several of them may choose to defect, rather than return to Iraq in time for a likely war and a possible overthrow of the government. ''It's a superb moment to try to turn some of them,'' said one official, ''and see what they know.''

It is unclear what proof, if any, the United States is providing to back up its claims that the diplomats are in fact Iraqi intelligence agents. Nor is it clear whether countries are demanding any more evidence.

If the administration can uncover some active plots, however, then it could back up Mr. Bush's repeated contention during his news conference here on Thursday night that Iraq poses a major, immediate threat to the United States.

Australia usually conducts some of the highest-level intelligence exchanges with the United States of any ally, but many other countries do not routinely receive such sensitive data.

The Iraqi ordered to leave Australia was one of fewer than half a dozen in the country.

The head of Iraq's diplomatic mission to Australia, Saad al-Samarai, said Mr. Aaref was not a spy, and he told Reuters today that ''It's a new thing on the international scene when a superpower asks other countries to expel diplomats and they do.''

In Berlin, German officials said on Friday that they had received a request for similar expulsions.
