

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE EUROPEANS; France and Germany Praise U.S. Pledge to Disclose Evidence on Iraq
By Richard Bernstein
Jan. 30, 2003

European and other leaders today welcomed President Bush's State of the Union announcement that the United States would disclose its evidence on Iraqi weapons programs, but other responses to the speech mirrored the disagreements that have long existed on the issue of any war with Iraq.

''I'm delighted by this American decision,'' the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, said. But, gently chiding the Bush administration, he added: ''It's been several weeks that we have been asking all those who have information to give it to the inspectors. We will study the American information. We will provide our own information. We will gather all of the information together in order to examine the situation from there on.''

Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany praised Mr. Bush for demonstrating ''that the place for the question must be the Security Council,'' where Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will present the American case on Iraqi weapons programs next Wednesday.

On other occasions, Mr. Schröder has stated that Germany would refuse to participate in a war even if the Security Council calls for one. But in a speech today, Mr. Schröder echoed diplomats and some leaders in recent days in Europe and the Arab world by expressing doubts that a war could any longer avoided.

''I am worried about whether we will succeed in avoiding a war in Iraq,'' he said.

One of the more intriguing reactions came from Russia, whose president, Vladimir V. Putin, hinted broadly on Tuesday that Russia might drop its insistence on a diplomatic solution -- if only to maintain cooperative relations with the United States.

Today, Russian officials seemed to be backtracking from that position, with the foreign minister, Igor Ivanov, reiterating Russia's past calls for the international community to do ''everything possible to avoid a war.'' But the Foreign Ministry spokesman, Aleksandr Yakovenko, noted: ''Close U.S.-Russian cooperation is crucial to achieving the tasks of maintaining security and stability in the world.''

In Brussels, the North Atlantic Council, the executive body of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, continued for a second week to be deadlocked over an American request that the alliance begin to formulate military plans for an eventual action against Iraq.

The American request had already produced what was described as a heated debate at NATO headquarters last week. At that meeting, France, Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg -- opposed the start of military planning on the grounds that diplomatic possibilities were not yet exhausted.

The American request concerns, among other things, deploying to protect Turkey, where Mr. Bush's speech seemed to aggravate anxieties already felt over the request to bring thousands of American troops into the country for a possible attack. Turkey's leaders are trying to find a way to grant the American request without inflaming popular opinion, which a recent poll reported to be running at 87 percent against a war.

In Poland, meanwhile, a government spokesman said that seven NATO heads of government, including those of Britain, Italy, Spain and Poland itself, have drafted a letter of support for the Bush administration.

''We must remain united in the dream that Saddam Hussein's regime be disarmed,'' the letter said, according to a translation from Polish. Referring to the United Nations resolution passed last November that requires Iraqi disarmament, ''Resolution 1441 is Saddam Hussein's last chance to disarm peacefully. It is up to him if he will use this chance to avoid a larger confrontation.''

In London, a spokesman for Prime Minister Tony Blair, who is traveling to the United States on Friday for what are billed as crucial deliberations with Mr. Bush, praised the president for setting out ''why we need to take action to ensure that Saddam is disarmed.''

''The case needs to be made over and over again. The world decided after Iraq invaded Kuwait that the price Iraq had to pay for its aggression was that it would not be allowed weapons of mass destruction,'' said the spokesman, who according to British tradition could not be identified.

Some European analysts suggested that Washington's offer to show proof of Iraqi stockpiles of banned weapons could have the effect of widening the gap between France and Germany. For months, France has been saying that war should be a final recourse, and if the American evidence is persuasive, this analysis goes, the French might move toward the Americans.

''The announcement that evidence will be provided is the essential thing because so much of the skepticism, especially in Germany, is based on the question, 'Is there enough?','' said Karl Kaiser, director of the German Council on Foreign Relations.

Another German foreign policy expert, Jürgen Falter, of the Institute for Political Science at Mainz University, said that if France decided to vote yes on a Security Council resolution authorizing military strikes, it would be almost impossible for Mr. Schröder and his foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, to vote no. They ''will not say yes to war, but they will abstain,'' Mr. Falter said.

He continued, ''They can't say no if there is unanimity among the other members of the Security Council.''
