

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; Antiwar Fever Puts Mexico In Quandary On Iraq Vote
By Ginger Thompson With Clifford Krauss
Feb. 28, 2003

Mexico holds one of the potentially decisive votes on the United Nations Security Council for an American-sponsored resolution authorizing war against Iraq. But its president is in a quandary about how to cast it.

Like other leaders around the world, President Vicente Fox has a citizenry overwhelming opposed to war -- between 70 and 83 percent, polls show. Anti-American attitudes have surfaced in political and intellectual circles, and he desperately needs public support for midterm elections, three months away.

But Mexico also shares a 2,000-mile border with the United States, and no country in the world sends more illegal immigrants across a border than Mexico does to the United States. Moreover, since the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement 10 years ago, perhaps no other country depends more on the United States for its economic well-being as does Mexico.

Mr. Fox's predicament was captured in a cartoon published in the Mexican newspaper Reforma: the president wobbles with a balance pole on a high wire, a small dove of peace perched at one end of the pole, a hulking American eagle on the other. Many political analysts think Mr. Fox will ultimately tilt toward the eagle.

After a telephone conversation with President Bush last weekend, Mr. Fox moved away from unequivocal calls for peace, warning that Saddam Hussein must disarm.

''The only path toward peace is the disarmament of Iraq,'' he said in a speech on Tuesday before a meeting of Mexican and American business leaders. ''The world wants peace, but only the disarmament of the Iraqis can assure peace.''

The statement marked a subtle but clear departure for Mr. Fox, whose speeches about Iraq had previously echoed Pope John Paul II's urgent appeals for peace. At an event nine days ago and again last week, Mr. Fox publicly prayed for peace. Then, in a speech to Mexico's military, he said Mexico was ''against unilateralism and against war.'' As late as last week, he issued a call of ''No to war.''

Mr. Fox's positions remain wobbly, strategically couched and ambiguous, as this country prepares to vote on a United Nations resolution supported by the United States, Great Britain and Spain that would lead to military action against Iraq.

While his language may be ambiguous, the reason for his ambiguity is clear. If Mexico follows Washington's lead, said a political analyst, Gabriel Guerra, ''the sign we will have given is that we do not have an independent foreign policy, that we cannot be a voice and a player on the international stage, because at the end of the day we do not have a backbone.''

More than just reflecting domestic political concerns, however, Mr. Fox's reluctance to support the United States is also the latest display of how his relationship with Mr. Bush has cooled.

''The relationship has taken a negative turn,'' Mr. Guerra said. ''Apart from a honeymoon of rhetoric, Mexico never won anything substantive.''

The honeymoon began when Mr. Bush chose Mexico for his first foreign trip as president, in February 2001. He agreed to begin work on an immigration accord sought by Mr. Fox, which could have given legal status to some 3.5 million undocumented Mexicans working in the United States.

Those talks were put off indefinitely after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the United States. Since then, Mr. Fox has been unable to make significant advances for his country on a range of issues, including Mexico's water debt with the United States, the execution of Mexican nationals on death row and various agricultural trade issues. In January, the frustrated architect of Mexico's immigration proposals, Jorge G. Castañeda, resigned as foreign minister.

At the other end of North America, Canada, which does not hold a seat on the Security Council, has also been wavering on the Iraq issue. For months, Prime Minister Jean Chrétien and senior officials have contradicted themselves on whether Iraq posed an immediate threat, and what position Canada would take if the United States and Great Britain unilaterally invaded Iraq without the approval of the United Nations

But Mr. Chrétien has moved more clearly toward Washington, offering a compromise Security Council resolution that calls for Iraq to disarm by March 28 or face war.

''Saddam Hussein is the one who can avoid war, by respecting Resolution 1441 and by respecting the United Nations,'' Mr. Chrétien said.

Today, both presidents issued more calls for Iraq to disarm in bilateral meetings here. At a news conference, Mr. Fox denied that his views on the war had shifted toward those of the United States, saying that Mexico would maintain its ''independence and autonomy.'' And he said that Mexico would take some of the points of Canada's proposal into discussions before the Security Council.

''We are opposed to war, like all the world, and as long as there are alternatives, that is our goal,'' Mr. Fox said, adding: ''If Saddam and Iraq are not going to comply with the demands of the inspectors, then things change. Without a doubt, they change for the whole world.''
