

A NATION CHALLENGED: THE ADMINISTRATION; U.S. Seen as Likely to Stay On Collision Path With Iraq
By Michael R. Gordon
March 9, 2002

In a stance that is likely to keep the United States on a collision course with Saddam Hussein's government, a senior Bush administration official warned today that United Nations weapons inspections would be a trap unless the monitors had immediate and unrestricted access to any site in Iraq.

''It has to be the kind of go anywhere, any time sort of inspection regime if the world is going to have any confidence that they've lived up to and are abiding by the U.N. Security Council resolution,'' the official said. ''There are those who suggest that our earlier inspections in Iraq were too limited.''

The official's comments were made one day after senior Iraqi officials came to the United Nations to discuss the possible return of weapons inspectors and as Vice President Dick Cheney prepared to leave on a trip to Britain and the Middle East to lay the political groundwork for a possible military campaign against Iraq.

During his 10-day trip, Mr. Cheney is expected to address a range of Arab and European concerns about a possible military campaign to topple Mr. Hussein.

To Arab leaders who say that their citizens would be outraged by an American offensive against Iraq, Mr. Cheney will be able to cite President Bush's decision to dispatch his special envoy, Gen. Anthony C. Zinni, to the Middle East and Washington's interest in Saudi Arabia's peace overture.

To address the concerns of Arab leaders that the war could be prolonged, he is likely to offer an assurance that any military offensive would be relatively short and decisive. Turkish concerns that a war would lead to the emergence of an independent Kurdish state might be assuaged with an assurance that if Mr. Hussein was toppled, the United States would support the territorial integrity of Iraq.

Israel will be eager to hear how the United States will preclude Iraq from firing missiles at its territory, as it did during the 1991 Persian Gulf War, if there is a new offensive against Baghdad. The possible return of weapons inspectors is also a sensitive issue, particularly to European nations, which have publicly urged diplomatic steps to avoid a confrontation.

Since President Bush designated Iraq as part of an ''axis of evil'' because of its pursuit of weapons of mass destruction, there has been speculation that Baghdad might allow the return of United Nations weapons inspectors to undermine Washington's case for a military campaign to unseat Mr. Hussein.

On Thursday, the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, met with the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, and the chairman of the United Nations arms inspection commission, Hans Blix. Western diplomats said that the meeting was cordial and that the Iraqis expressed concern that United Nations inspections might be used as cover for American spying.

The Iraqi position suggested that Baghdad might allow new inspections, but not unrestricted monitoring. Iraqi and United Nations officials agreed to meet on the inspection and other issues in April. American intelligence believes that Iraq is trying to develop nuclear weapons, has a small arsenal of ballistic missiles and has secret stocks of chemical and biological arms.

On the face of it, Washington would seem to have little reason for concern. Mr. Blix has said that for inspections to be effective they must be immediate, unconditional and unrestricted.

''For the credibility of future inspection it is important that there are no sanctuaries and that access is without any delay that might permit the removal of evidence,'' Mr. Blix said in a recent speech to prospective inspectors in Geneva. ''In these regards there are no changes.''

But many in the Bush administration remain distrustful of the inspection process, fearing it will lead to months of wrangling over the degree of access the inspectors might have to suspected weapon sites in Iraq, wrangling that would delay efforts to organize an insurgency or take direct military action to topple the Hussein government.

At the same time, some Bush administration officials are also concerned that they will have no chance of attracting allied support for a military campaign against Iraq unless Washington is able to make the case that it tried to resolve its concerns over Iraq's weapons of mass destruction through the United Nations before resorting to force.

The Bush administration's solution for this quandary appears to be to stress Washington's support for United Nations inspections, which were called for in Security Council resolutions after the 1991 Persian Gulf war to ensure that Baghdad had given up its weapons of mass destruction. But the Bush administration is coupling this with the demand that Iraq meet a tough standard: the acceptance of inspections that could be carried out anywhere in Iraq with virtually no notice. It is a test that some key Bush administration officials seem to be calculating that Iraq will fail.

Before the Thursday meeting, the United States and Britain pressed Mr. Annan to take a firm stand on the inspection issue with the Iraqis while Russia urged that he show flexibility.
