
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq, Denouncing the U.S., Says It Has Done All It Can to Avoid a War
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 28, 2003

Iraq made a scathing attack on the United States today hours before a United Nations report on weapons inspections was delivered in New York.

A statement from the Foreign Ministry was more strident in tone than those issued here in recent days -- and more emphatic in claiming that Iraq had little else to offer the United States to head off war.

''The ball is in their court,'' the foreign minister, Naji Sabri, said at a news conference here. ''We have done everything possible to let this country and the whole world avoid the danger and the threat of war and destruction by the warmongers of Washington and their ally Tony Blair,'' the British prime minister.

''They are fond of exporting destruction and death to our part of the world, and we have done everything to avoid this,'' he added. ''They are the ones who are escalating the situation, making a lot of threats, fabricating and creating every day a lot of lies.''

Asked if he thought war was inevitable, he said he could not rule out any last-minute diplomacy. But he added, ''It's inevitable for the warmongers.''

Mr. Sabri's comments seemed aimed largely at the Arab world and, with Baghdad eight hours ahead of New York, at filling evening airtime in the region with a rebuttal to a report officials here already knew would be mixed at best. He offered no opening statement in English, speaking mostly in Arabic.

By contrast, the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations addressed reporters in New York in English after Hans Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, the heads of the inspection teams, had delivered their reports. The ambassador, Mohammed Aldouri, struck a more conciliatory tone, saying repeatedly that Iraq was willing to answer any questions the inspectors pose.

As has been the case nearly every day recently, hundreds of Iraqis, mostly doctors and students, protested outside the United Nations complex today, in a nation where demonstrations are unusual without government approval. Mr. Blix directly criticized the protests in his report to the Security Council today.

But the inspections, which began anew in November after four years, kept to schedule: inspectors today watched the test firing of a missile engine at the Al-Rafah plant southwest of Baghdad, on a steel testing stand that United States officials said might have been used for missiles more powerful than those of 90-mile range permitted to Iraq by the United Nations.

Mr. Sabri repeated charges with some resonance in Muslim nations: that the United States aims to ''colonize'' the region for its oil and to protect Israel in what he called its ''terrorist aggression against the Palestinian people.''

''By controlling this region they are dreaming of dominating the whole world,'' he said. ''So they are intending to terrify the whole people into submission with their evil plans.''

By this evening, officials in Iraq had held no news conference to convey reaction to the report itself, so it was impossible to know in any more depth how the reports of Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei were received here.

The men's appearance at the United Nations was not carried live on Iraqi TV, and few Iraqis have access to satellite television.

Still, the outlines of the report were generally known, and Mr. Sabri often repeated one basic line: that the United Nations inspectors, for all the unanswered questions Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei cited today, had not found evidence of prohibited weapons or programs to develop them.

He sidestepped questions about whether he felt the inspectors should continue, if in fact the United States was determined to strike anyway. He said merely that the inspectors had been invited back ''for the whole international community to know that the fact is, the truth is: in this country there are no prohibited weapons.''

Though he spoke before the report was issued, Mr. Sabri sought to rebut two of the chief complaints of the inspectors, both in meetings here last week and in the report presented today.

He said that Iraq had been encouraging Iraqi scientists to speak with United Nations inspectors without the presence of an Iraqi government minder, as it pledged to do several times, most recently to Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei last week.

But at least nine scientists have refused so far -- and Mr. Sabri said there was no way to force them.

''I think you care very much in the United States and in Europe for personal freedom, personal liberties,'' he said at a news conference packed with many Western reporters. ''Are those scientists not covered by this concept?''

He added, ''In this matter they are splitting hairs.''

He also defended, as other officials here have done, Iraq's decision not to allow surveillance by a U-2 spy plane to help the inspectors. He said Iraq had not actually refused, but said it could not guarantee the plane's safety, when American and British warplanes patrol the north and south of the country enforcing no-flight zones for Iraqi craft.

''How can we differentiate between the U-2 and other planes?'' he asked.
