

Split on Iraq May Harm U.S.-Europe Trade Ties
By Mark Landler With Eric Pfanner
March 19, 2003

With France and Germany at diplomatic loggerheads with the United States over Iraq, businesspeople here are watching nervously for signs that the trans-Atlantic dispute will spill over into commerce.

So far, the only confirmed example of a ruptured business relationship involves a small leather manufacturer in eastern Germany. The company's owner and chief executive, Grit Kuhnt, said it had lost an important American customer because of the German government's lack of support for the United States.

The case drew widespread attention here because Ms. Kuhnt wrote an angry letter to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, urging him to reverse his antiwar stance, so as not to sacrifice German-American friendship on the ''altar of short-term political success.''

Mr. Schröder reaffirmed his opposition to military action today; so did President Jacques Chirac of France. The United States and Britain have blamed France for much of the diplomatic impasse.

In such a toxic atmosphere, rumors about reprisals against French and German companies flare up regularly. The latest was a radio report in Paris on Monday that a French catering company, Sodexho Alliance, had lost a $1 billion contract to supply food to the United States Marine Corps.

Sodexho and the Marine Corps denied the report, though a spokesman for the Marines in Washington, Capt. Nat Fahy, said, ''We have fielded a lot of protests over the fact that we have a contract with a French-based company.''

At the start of stock trading in Paris on Monday, Sodexho's shares plunged 14 percent before the confusion was cleared up; it recovered by the end of the day, and the company demanded an inquiry by market regulators.

Other French companies are lowering their national profile in the United States. Accor, the hotel conglomerate, has taken down French flags from 7 of its 10 Sofitel hotels in the United States.

''It was a precautionary measure to calm the situation,'' Paul Charoy, a spokesman, said. ''There's no political statement behind this. It's more a need we have to keep our customers and employees comfortable.''

For France and Germany, the economic cost of a sundered trade relationship with the United States would be enormous. Germany exports more than $56 billion worth of products a year to the United States, making it the fifth-largest supplier to the American market. France ranks ninth with shipments worth more than $26 billion a year.

France is the fourth-largest foreign investor in the United States, after Britain, Japan and the Netherlands. France and, to a lesser extent, Germany depend on Americans to support their tourism industries. Three million Americans visited France last year.

Some businesspeople here say the danger to European companies is exaggerated, or at least misplaced.

The rise of the euro's value against the dollar -- which is making European exports, and visits to Europe, more expensive for Americans -- poses a greater threat than any political reaction. The shaky economy in the United States is curbing Americans' appetite for French Champagne and German sports cars irrespective of politics.

Luxury goods makers like LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton of France and Hugo Boss of Germany said they had not detected any reaction against their goods in the United States.

''People buy Hugo Boss suits because they are well made and fashionable, not for any political reason,'' said Philipp Wolff, a spokesman for the designer, which gets a sixth of its total sales in the United States.

Among German exporters of heavy machinery, however, there is less confidence. In a recent survey conducted by a German trade association, 25 percent of companies said that tension between Berlin and Washington had already negatively affected their dealings in the United States. If the tension persists, 63 percent of the companies predicted it would jeopardize their business relationships.

German automobile executives have also lobbied Chancellor Schröder about the risks to their exports in the United States. Mercedes-Benz and BMW operate huge assembly plants in the United States, which underscores that there are risks on both sides of the Atlantic.

Companies that depend on American government contracts feel especially vulnerable. When the Defense Department recently scaled back a $36 million contract with Krauss-Maffei, a German maker of armored vehicles, the move prompted speculation that the company was a victim of the political crosswinds. United States officials said the decision had nothing to do with Iraq.

American business leaders in Europe are campaigning feverishly to keep these jitters from multiplying.

''Germans worry by nature,'' Fred B. Irwin, the chairman of the American Chamber of Commerce in Germany, said. ''I keep reminding them that procurement standards in the United States are so tight.''

Business diplomacy has its limits, however. Mr. Irwin tried to mediate between Lederett, the German leather maker, and its American customer, Enefco International, which is based in Auburn, Me. He finally gave up. The owner of Enefco, Norman Farrar, said in his letter terminating his business with Lederett, ''Hopefully in the near future the political climate in Germany will change and I will once again feel comfortable using Lederett material.''

Nothing has changed yet, a company official said today.
