

A NATION AT WAR: WITH THE TROOPS -- FIRST MARINE DIVISION; Marines Race to Attack As Iraqi Oil Wells Burn
By John Kifner
March 22, 2003

A lonely camel lopes through the dust under a Marine Huey helicopter, but across the vast stretch of Iraqi desert, the eye is riveted on two things: seemingly endless convoys of American and some British military vehicles grinding north and northwest on every paved highway, and bright orange plumes of flame and gray-black smoke from a half-dozen burning oil wells.

That all of this oil field -- one of the world's richest -- is not completely ablaze is a result of a swift assault that began at dusk on Thursday, more than 12 hours ahead of schedule. It was an attack that was in part planned, in part improvised on the fly by elements of the First Marine Division.

''Initially, we were planning on going in this morning,'' said Capt. Shawn Blodgett, whose company seized an oil-refining area, GOSP-4, the abbreviation for a gas-oil separation plant.

''We were at a staff meeting when the call came down,'' Captain Blodgett said at a sand-blown base here this afternoon as four wells burned on the horizon.

Within minutes of the call last evening, more than 200 marines, along with a handful of British ordnance specialists, were headed north in a column of 28 Humvees, amphibious assault vehicles and other transports.

A second wave of the attack began at 6 a.m. today (10 p.m. Thursday Eastern time) with more marines breaching the border along a wide front.

By nightfall, nearly all of the division's 20,000 troops were inside Iraq, driving some 60 miles to the Euphrates River and taking control of a large swath of territory, often simply bypassing smaller Iraqi positions.

The Iraqi Army's 51st Mechanized Division crumbled swiftly, senior Marine officers said, and their commander formally surrendered.

''Their officers have cut and run,'' a Marine intelligence officer said this morning, adding that many of the Iraqi officers appeared to have fled to the city of Basra.

The marines, a senior officer said, were now poised to drive either north or west, both directions that could lead to Baghdad, posing difficult decisions for an enemy commander on the defensive.

''We're presenting him with a number of problems,'' the senior officer said, ''more than he can get his arms around.''

The Marines had moved the entire division, which was based in Kuwait, to forward positions along the border in the last few days, speeding up their preparations after President Bush's speech on Monday night. Still, the timing was uncertain.

That all changed at 5 p.m. Thursday when Col. John Kelly, the division's assistant commander, received a message from higher command that Iraqi forces had begun setting the southern oil fields ablaze.

The news brought fears of a repetition of the destruction of the 1991 Persian Gulf war, when hundreds of Kuwaiti wells were set on fire by retreating Iraqi forces, with great economic and ecological losses.

Colonel Kelly, a Boston Irishman who has been promoted to the rank of brigadier general but is waiting to pin on his star inside Iraq, quickly called Col. Joe Dunford, commander of the Fifth Regimental Combat Team, a force of 6,000 troops reinforced with additional tanks, artillery and combat engineers. Their job would be to take and hold the oil fields.

How fast could he get an attack organized? Colonel Kelly asked.

Four hours, Colonel Dunford replied.

When Colonel Kelly called back 15 minutes later, Colonel Dunford already had marines on the road and said he could cut the time to two hours.

But artillery and air support had to be organized as well, so a timetable of three hours for the main attack was agreed upon.

As a first wave of Super Cobra helicopter gunships buzzed north at 6:25 p.m., the division's artillery units began a barrage against Iraqi positions. The booms, crumps and flashes of the shells lit up the horizon throughout the night.

At 8:35, the first marines crossed the border, which was marked by barriers of sand berms, fences and antitank trenches 12 feet deep and wide.

They had been expecting at least 12 hours' notice, recalled Lt. Col. Frederick M. Padilla, the commander of the First Battalion.

''We were in a meeting when I got the yellow canary,'' he said, referring to the yellow four-part carbon paper slips on which orders are passed in the Marines. ''The message was, 'Move out now, move out immediately.' I'm saving it.''

Troops under his command destroyed two aged T-55 Soviet-made tanks with Javelin antitank missiles.

There was another sharp battle at a pumping station in the oil fields in which dug-in Iraqi troops fought with machine guns and small arms and a marine second lieutenant was killed. Otherwise, Marine officers described resistance as light, with increasing numbers of Iraqi soldiers surrendering.

''We thrive in the imperfect; we excel at friction,'' Colonel Padilla said, using Marine jargon for difficulty. The oil field having been taken, he was relaxing in a folding chair at his new command post.

''Last night was nothing but friction,'' he said. ''Friction and the fog of war.''
