

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE OPPOSITION; U.S. Envoy's Effort to Recruit Iraqi Exile for Possible Future Government Sparks Protests
By Judith Miller
Feb. 11, 2003

President Bush's special envoy to the Iraqi opposition is quietly trying to recruit a former senior Iraqi official to help provide a transition to democracy in the event that Saddam Hussein is ousted, administration officials said today.

But the effort by Zalmay Khalilzad, the White House envoy, to woo Adnan Pachachi, an octogenarian exile who once served as a foreign minister and ambassador to the United Nations for Iraq, has sparked opposition within the administration and among other Iraqi exiles.

Mr. Pachachi declared publicly in 1961 that Kuwait was part of Iraq and had no right to exist independently, a statement he renounced in 1999.

Laith Kubba, another exile and a researcher at the Washington-based National Endowment for Democracy, defended Mr. Pachachi, calling him a ''voice of authority and wisdom'' and saying that ''he must be allowed to play a role.''

Mr. Khalilzad recently traveled to the United Arab Emirates to recruit Mr. Pachachi. But officials said that several Pentagon officials and Iraq experts had warned Mr. Khalilzad that the effort at this late stage would backfire politically and could alienate Kuwait, an essential base of operations in any gulf war.

''The outreach to Mr. Pachachi, a once ardent Arab nationalist and Sunni Muslim, the minority branch of Islam in Iraq, suggests that the United States is mainly interested in perpetuating the status quo in a post-Saddam Iraq, and not in promoting democracy,'' an administration official said.

Danielle Pletka, a vice president of the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington-based research center, called the effort ''very disappointing.''

''Pachachi was the first person that the administration tried to cultivate as an alternative to Ahmad Chalabi and to other Iraqi exiles who have been working for over a decade to oust Saddam,'' she said. Mr. Chalabi is the secular, Shiite leader of the Iraqi National Congress, the opposition umbrella group that the administration officially supports.

Officials said Mr. Khalilzad was scheduled to meet Mr. Pachachi on Tuesday. Mr. Khalilzad's office said he could not be reached because he was traveling, and he did not respond to questions e-mailed to him about the diplomatic flap.

Several officials said that at the Pentagon in particular, objections had been raised to the recruitment of Mr. Pachachi in meetings with Mr. Khalilzad and with State Department officials. The State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency are known to have strong reservations about Mr. Chalabi's leadership of the Iraqi National Congress. They complain that he has little support inside Iraq and doubt that he is a commanding enough figure to lead a transition to democracy.

Both the State Department and the C.I.A. have sought to broaden the Iraqi opposition, apparently in the hope of finding someone who could serve the role that President Hamid Karzai has played in Afghanistan. Mr. Khalilzad has worked to include what some officials denigrate as ''Sunni establishment'' figures in a consultative council that Mr. Khalilzad is trying to create.

Ms. Pletka, other Iraq experts and several Administration officials said recruiting Mr. Pachachi also raised questions about whether plans for a post-Hussein leadership were falling behind plans for a war.

Francis Brooke, the Iraqi National Congress's longstanding Washington adviser, said that the I.N.C. was still barred from spending American money to foment opposition to the Hussein government inside Iraq, and that a shortage of funds had forced the umbrella group to shut down its radio and television stations in northern Iraq. Mr. Brooke said his group had received no money for such activities since July.

''The lack of planning for a post-Saddam Iraq shows confusion that is very troubling,'' he said. ''And in some minds it calls into question the U.S. commitment to a united, democratic opposition.''

Mr. Chalabi is in northern Iraq, meeting with Kurdish leaders and other opposition figures and trying to organize a meeting of dissidents there. The meeting, which has repeatedly been postponed, is now scheduled for Saturday, though some dissidents said it could be deferred again.

Meanwhile, Mr. Khalilzad has been trying to organize yet another meeting of exiles in London this week, leading some Iraqi dissidents to question whether the administration is trying to prevent the I.N.C. from gathering because it fears that Mr. Chalabi and the Kurdish leaders might try to form a government-in-exile at their meeting.

The Bush administration has decided against promoting the formation of such a government in exile, a decision that some Iraq experts have praised.

''Washington can't anoint a group of exiles and tell the Iraqi people: here they are, meet your new leaders, and have Iraqis find people they don't know and don't like,'' said Ken Pollack, a former White House Middle East expert in the Clinton administration. ''That would make us look like a colonial power.''

But Mr. Chalabi and Kurdish leaders have repeatedly said they did not want to form a government in exile. They have said they would rather establish a coordinating committee that would work with other exiles and Iraqis, once they were liberated, to build a democratic government in Baghdad.
