

LOSS OF THE SHUTTLE: NEWS MEDIA; Disaster Prompts Quick Shift of Coverage From Iraq Issue to Events at Home
By Jim Rutenberg and David Carr
Feb. 3, 2003

For months, news outlets had put much of their attention and resources into covering a possible war with Iraq. On Saturday, the space shuttle disaster forced a hard switch from one major event to another.

It became clear that for the next few days at least, news about Iraq would have to fight for time and space with news about the shuttle.

Correspondents and anchors were hurriedly recalled from foreign posts. Newsmagazines ripped up their issues at the last minute, and the television networks switched from heavy use of maps of the Persian Gulf region to even heavier use of maps from the Gulf of Mexico region.

Charles Gibson and Diane Sawyer, the co-anchors of ''Good Morning America'' on ABC, had just arrived in Turkey on Saturday to cover its potential supporting role in an invasion of Iraq. Within hours, they were on their way back to the United States. Harry Smith, co-anchor of ''The Early Show'' on CBS, had just landed in Jordan when he was called back to New York, said his producer, Michael Bass.

The Sunday morning talk shows on the major networks hastily switched plans, too. George Stephanopoulos, the host of ABC's ''This Week,'' was in the process of boarding a jetliner to London, where he was to interview Tony Blair, the British prime minister, about the confrontation with Iraq. Instead, he stayed in Washington and did a two-hour special about the shuttle disaster.

Tim Russert, the moderator of ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, canceled interviews with Tom DeLay, the House majority leader, and Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont and a presidential candidate, to cover the breakup of the shuttle.

The tragedy tested the limits of much of the news media at a time when their resources are already stretched thin. Times have changed since the Challenger space shuttle exploded in 1986. The staffs of the television news divisions were shaved significantly through the 1990's as costs rose along with demands for higher profits. Executives at the major outlets, however, said that they had been prepared for the disaster on Saturday in large part because of a back bench of reporters who regularly cover NASA, if in relative obscurity. Quietly at the ready for all manned space missions, they were suddenly called to prominence.

''The dark side of this,'' said Jeffrey Kluger, a senior writer for Time and co-author of ''Lost Moon: The Perilous Voyage of Apollo 13,'' ''is that networks maintain a presence for all launchings and landings for just this kind of possibility.''

For instance, William Harwood, a CBS News space consultant, is routinely in place for shuttle landings.

A network spokeswoman, Sandy Genelius said, ''He very rarely gets on television because the launches and re-entries normally go without a hitch.'' On Saturday, he was on the air as much as anybody else on the network.

Miles O'Brien, an anchor and space correspondent for CNN who had been planning to cover the shuttle landing as a routine event, commented on his sudden vault into the spotlight.

''It doesn't matter how much of an expert you are on space, you're sometimes yelling into a vacuum,'' he said. ''It's interesting how your value to a news organization is so dependent on events completely out of your control.''

Robert Bazell, a science reporter for NBC News who also covered the Challenger disaster, said he and his colleagues might have had an easier time than in 1986, when many journalists complained that NASA was not helpful. ''They seemed to be more forthcoming on Saturday,'' he said. ''I certainly hope they learned their lesson from Challenger, that openness is what the public wants and expects.''

The question on the minds of most news executives, however, was how to proceed in the next few weeks. Neal Shapiro, the NBC News president, predicted that the shuttle would stay foremost on the minds of Americans for some time and said he would plan to handle two fronts.

''Ever since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks,'' he said, ''it has been clear that news divisions have to be able to cover big breaking domestic stories at the same time as big foreign stories.''

But Jim Kelly, the managing editor of Time, said he believed that the shuttle disaster would not command as much coverage in coming days. ''My guess is that unless they uncover the reasons that this happened in the next few days, Iraq will be back with a vengeance,'' he said.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is to present the United States' case against Iraq to the United Nations' Security Council on Wednesday.

On Saturday, Time and Newsweek hastily made over their magazines, which have Saturday night deadlines. Time will publish 17 pages of disaster coverage; Newsweek, 20. U.S. News & World Report was not able to change its plans because it was already well along in printing its next issue when the disaster struck. It is expected to produce a 50-page special issue about the shuttle that will be on newsstands on Wednesday.
