
A NATION AT WAR: AIR COMBAT; Iraqis Say U.S. or British Pilot Fell Into Tigris
By John F. Burns
March 24, 2003

For hours today, thousands of excited Iraqis gathered on an embankment along the Tigris River in the heart of Baghdad, and on a bridge above, to cheer on soldiers. The Iraqi troops were hunting, or so the word went, for an American or British pilot said to have parachuted from his stricken plane high above the city and dropped into the river's murky waters.

For the crowds, the hunt was something to distract from the tension of waiting for more bombs and missiles to fall, or for American troops to arrive at the gates of Baghdad. Whether there ever was a stricken plane, or any fugitive pilot, was unresolved well into the night, when soldiers with rifles were still firing into the riverbank bulrushes and setting them afire, and powerboats with frogmen were still cruising the river, searchlights scanning for the pilot.

By then, some Iraqis had concluded that it might all be a case of hyperactive imaginations, or perhaps a mild form of the hysteria sometimes brought on by war.

At an evening news conference, the defense minister, Gen. Sultan Hashim, evaded questions about other official claims that as many as five coalition aircraft had been shot down, and stayed silent, too, on the question of the hunt along the river. ''When we have any information to give you, we will tell you,'' he said.

In a way, though, the tough calculations hardly mattered, at least not to the Iraqis out by the river today.

It appeared far from certain that most of the spectators wanted the pilot caught, and certain that almost none of them wished him dead. Walking among the crowds on Sinica bridge, there were dozens of people eager to say hello, and to ask the nationality of the two English-speaking foreigners.

Told that they were American and British, respectively, there were broad smiles and handshakes. There were palms cupped and upraised in the Muslim fashion, suggesting a prayer for the pilot's survival. There were many hopes for the war's quick end.

One man in his 30's, a deaf mute, acted out a mime for the visitors that suggested some wider undercurrents about the war. First, he pictured the pilot floating down in his harness, then hitting the water, then being seized by the Iraqi soldiers, then getting punched on the nose.

But a while later, after watching other Iraqis hanging about the foreigners, talking easily, with no sign of any lurking secret police agent of the kind so often present here, he offered another version.

This time, the pilot came down, hit the water, surfaced briefly for a gulp of air, dived again, swam rapidly downstream, then surfaced, looked about, scrambled up the riverbank and raced away.

What made this version all the more astonishing was that it came just as a plane, perhaps a B-52, was passing high overhead after dropping bombs that had exploded with a shattering impact on an invisible target a few miles away to the southwest.

The hunt on the riverbank was concentrated between the Sinica and Jumhuriya bridges across the Tigris, a stretch of about 1,200 yards.

Clearly visible on the same western riverbank, was the sprawling presidential compound that was ground zero for the heavy American air attacks that began on Friday night. The wrecked and burned ruins of four major government buildings, one of them Saddam Hussein's presidential office, were also in plain view.

In the face of the air attacks that crumpled so many symbols of the Iraqi leader's power, westerners might have expected real hostility moving about Baghdad, and there was some, from senior officials who predicted bitterly that America would get its comeuppance once fighting moves to the streets of Baghdad.

But otherwise, there was silence, or the accustomed amiability for Americans and Britons, perhaps moved up a notch. Beside the river, there was a sense of a Sunday afternoon entertainment, with fathers hoisting small sons on their shoulders, shoeshine boys of seven and eight hawking their services, and men with handcarts offering soft drinks and cigarettes.

Just by lingering on the bridge, for hours in many cases, the onlookers demonstrated a confidence that the air attacks will not, this time, be aimed at bridges -- or, ordinary Iraqis hope, at power plants, the water supply and telephone system.

Bright sunlight poked through a pall of heavy black smoke from a ring of oil trenches that were set afire around the city on Saturday, and still burning today, apparently to try and blind attacking aircraft and missiles.

But there was little that was magnanimous about the soldiers who fired into the water with Kalashnikov rifles when they spotted a floating reed, or the senior army officers in dark green uniforms, with pistols at their hips, who boarded the speedboats that cruised the river, offering rugged handshakes to the boatmen.

Their grim demeanor offered another kind of tableau, of what may await American troops when -- or, as Iraqis would say, if -- they enter Baghdad.
