

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRITAIN; Blair Speech Mutes Protests By Union Leaders on Iraq
By Warren Hoge
Sept. 11, 2002

Prime Minister Tony Blair took on British critics of his hard-line stance on Iraq today, pledging to work for a solution through the United Nations and not to take any action without submitting the case to Parliament.

In a tough speech to the Trades Union Congress at its annual convention in Blackpool, Mr. Blair coupled his promise to involve the United Nations with a warning that ''action will follow'' if President Saddam Hussein of Iraq ignored demands to let weapons inspectors back into the country.

''If the challenge to us is to work with the United Nations, we will respond to it,'' he told the delegates. ''But if we do so, then the challenge to all of us in the United Nations is this: The United Nations must be the way to resolve the threat from Saddam, not a way of avoiding it.''

On Monday, the union held a noisy debate over Iraq, with a motion declaring that Britain should obtain United Nations approval for any action barely winning out over a more defiant measure condemning any move on Iraq. A number of union leaders had predicted that Mr. Blair would be heckled and jeered when he appeared today, but his 25-minute speech was greeted with respectful silence throughout and a standing ovation at its conclusion.

Mr. Blair effectively pre-empted protests by beginning his talk with a grim and graphic description of Saddam Hussein's history of the use of chemical weapons. He then delivered a disarming lesson from a year ago when he had been about to address the union at its conference in Brighton at the moment he received the news of the attacks in the United States and had to leave the stage to return to London.

''Suppose I had come last year on the same day as this year -- Sept. 10,'' he said. ''Suppose I had said to you: 'There is a terrorist network called Al Qaeda. It operates out of Afghanistan. It has carried out several attacks and we believe it is planning more. It has been condemned by the United Nations in the strongest terms. Unless it is stopped, the threat will grow. And so I want to take action to prevent that.'

''Your response and probably that of most people would have been very similar to the response of some of you yesterday.''

Mr. Blair, who met with President Bush at Camp David on Saturday, has been the staunchest foreign supporter of the Bush administration's call for action and has sought to generate support for the initiative among other European nations and in Russia, where he is scheduled to travel later this month.

But a majority of the British public, large numbers of Labor members of Parliament and a trade union movement that has become newly emboldened with the election of a new generation of militant leaders have expressed disapproval of Mr. Blair's closeness to Mr. Bush and of his commitment to involving Britain in the move on Saddam Hussein.

His performance seemed to calm the protest, at least temporarily. ''I am quite happy with the speech; it wasn't the clash we predicted,'' said Derek Simpson, a former Communist who stunned 10 Downing Street in July by winning control of Amicus, Britain's second largest union, from Sir Ken Jackson, the prime minister's closest ally in the labor movement.

The general secretary of the Trades Union Congress, John Monks, said of the prime minister's talk, ''Against a difficult background, I think he has earned a lot of respect from delegates.''

In London, a move by dissident members of Parliament to hold an unofficial session in a church hall to protest Mr. Blair's failure to heed their call for a special session before Oct. 15, the end of its recess, appeared to lose steam with Mr. Blair's declaration that he would submit the matter to full debate.

''There is no substitute for the prime minister at the dispatch box responding to members of Parliament from all sides of the house,'' said Menzies Campbell, the Liberal Democrats' foreign policy spokesman and an outspoken opponent of swift action in Iraq. Mr. Campbell added that Mr. Blair ''still has to make his case to the British people.''

Mr. Blair is due back in the same hall in two weeks for the Labor Party's annual convention, and delegates have said they intend to make the Iraq policy a centerpiece of the conference business.

In his speech today, Mr. Blair said he was aware of the doubts in the country about taking military action, but he argued that not acting ran greater risks. ''If we do not deal with the threat from this international outlaw and his barbaric regime, it may not erupt and engulf us this month or next, perhaps not even this year or the next, but it will at some point,'' he said.

''And,'' he said, ''I do not want it on my conscience that we knew the threat, saw it coming and did nothing.''
