

A NATION AT WAR: THE KOREAN PENINSULA; South Korea Delays Vote On Sending Troops to Iraq
By James Brooke
March 29, 2003

Exposing the latest crack in South Korea's alliance with the United States, the Parliament here bowed to spreading protests today and delayed for a second time a vote on sending 700 army engineers and medical doctors to Iraq.

The delay was a setback for Seoul's one-month-old liberal government. Elected on a wave of protests against the American military presence here, President Roh Moo Hyun is trying to bridge the gap between his electorate and his desire to retain the 37,000 American troops posted here.

The legislators' decision to delay a vote on sending 700 rear-guard troops to Iraq nearly coincided with the news that the United States is sending an additional 100,000 troops to the Persian Gulf. Unable to demonstrate South Korea's symbolic support, Seoul's new foreign minister, Yoon Young Kwan, began two days of talks in Washington today with Bush administration officials, including Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

''Will General Tommy Franks suddenly 'discover' that he needs the Second Infantry Division in Iraq?'' said Robyn Lim, a conservative foreign affairs professor based in Japan, referring to the front-line American troops here. ''In crying 'Yankee go home,' South Koreans should have been more careful about what they asked for.''

In a poll conducted last month, the withdrawal of American soldiers was favored by 68.4 percent of 2,154 South Korean adults interviewed by Fn Research and Consulting, an affiliate of a business newspaper here.

Mr. Roh does not want to be remembered as the leader who presided over the breakup of South Korea's 50-year-old alliance with the United States. He has tried to sell the sending of troops to Iraq as a way to win leverage with the United States over its policies for the Korean Peninsula.

''I made the decision for the national interest because we may get a bigger say in dealing with the United States by sending noncombat troops,'' Mr. Roh told party leaders late on Tuesday.

Iraq owes $1.1 billion to the Hyundai Engineering & Construction Company, and South Korean construction companies have been among the most powerful supporters of the American-led attack in Iraq. ''We will exert all-out efforts to participate in the rehabilitation of infrastructure in Iraq,'' one Korean construction company association said.

At a small pro-American rally outside the National Assembly, Kim Wan Hee, a 65-year-old navy veteran, said, ''If the U.S. destroys Iraq, we can send more Korean workers for recovery work or construction work there, which would help our economy.''

A decade ago, in the first gulf war, South Korea contributed a field hospital, air transport and $500 million.

This time, support for the war has been undermined by distaste for American unilateralism and a widespread fear that once Saddam Hussein has been disposed of, the Bush administration will turn its sights on North Korea.

''This whole war is for strengthening U.S. power over the world,'' Kwon Dae Keun, a 23-year-old political science student, said at a demonstration outside the National Assembly here. ''If there would be a war on North Korea, we would mobilize bigger rallies with stronger will and strength.''

Student groups at several Seoul universities are planning one-day strikes next week to protest the military aid proposal.

The National Human Rights Commission of Korea, a government agency, also weighed in this week, saying, ''The war of aggression on Iraq, led by the United States and England, was not approved by the U.N. Security Council, and is an inhumane act that may kill hundreds of thousands of people.''

In the past, the commission has declined to comment on the human rights situation in Communist-run North Korea, arguing that its mandate is to deal with domestic issues. President Roh, seeking to placate a group of supporters, was quoted by an aide as saying, ''The agency was doing its duty when it outlined its stance, although it was different from the government.''

Indeed, Mr. Roh's voters are the most vocal opponents of sending aid to Iraq. But a bipartisan group of 68 legislators, or one-quarter of the total, maneuvered to delay the authorizing vote.

''There are no grounds at all for South Korea to send forces to help the unilateral military action led by the United States,'' said a statement released by a group of legislators.

With a parliamentary election a year away, militant unions and left-wing civic groups are threatening to campaign to unseat ''criminal'' legislators who vote to send troops.
