

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 24, 2003; A Helicopter Down, Taunts From Hussein and Patrols Over New York
By Anthony Depalma
March 25, 2003

The invasion of Iraq, premised on overwhelming strength and lightning speed, was slowed by stubborn resistance from Iraqi fighters and by a developing sandstorm. American troops took heavy fire as they tried to break through the ''red zone'' around Baghdad, and an Apache helicopter attack force was repulsed by small-arms fire. Saddam Hussein went on television to taunt American troops, and President Bush prepared to present Congress with the preliminary cost estimate for the war -- $74.7 billion.

ADVANCES AND OBSTACLES -- The vanguard of American troops has now thrust more than 300 miles inside Iraq. Gathering south of Baghdad, a force of 32 Apache helicopters attacked the Medina Division of Iraq's Republican Guard to prepare the way for the entrance of ground troops into the Iraqi capital. But a wall of antiaircraft fire drove back the helicopters. One copter went down, and Iraqi television said its two-man crew had been captured. While advance troops have nearly reached Baghdad, a fierce desert sandstorm has reduced visibility to near zero, complicating the fighting that continues in and around cities bypassed in the opening days of the war. About 5,000 marines dug in at Nasiriya continue to battle for control of the city. Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who is scheduled to meet President Bush on Thursday, revealed for the first time that British and American troops were attacking sites in eastern Iraq, a sign that Baghdad itself may be attacked from two opposing directions.

As fighting neared Baghdad, fears increased that Saddam Hussein might resort to using chemical weapons. Some captured Iraqi soldiers were carrying new gas masks, an indication they were prepared to respond to a chemical attack.

HUSSEIN EXHORTS IRAQIS -- Several Iraqi leaders, including Mr. Hussein, resurfaced to issue a defiant challenge to American troops to cross the remaining 50 miles to a showdown in Baghdad. Mr. Hussein, who apparently survived an American bombing, appeared on television. In a 25-minute speech he taunted American and British forces that he said were ''in real trouble.'' Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz said all but one member of the Iraqi leadership had survived the bombing that marked the start of the war.

PRISONERS IDENTIFIED -- American military commanders say they do not know exactly how many soldiers were killed or captured in the ambush of Apache helicopters outside Baghdad on Sunday. The Iraqi government is believed to be holding five soldiers and has been showing their images on television. The Pentagon has identified two of them as Chief Warrant Officer Ronald D. Young Jr., 26, of Georgia, and Chief Warrant Officer David S. Williams, 30, of Florida. An Army official said seven soldiers were killed in the attack, and three others are missing.

ALONG THE TURKISH BORDER -- Maj. Gen. Henry P. Osman of the Marines took charge of a new military command center from which he will coordinate relief efforts and oversee the activities of special operations soldiers who have already been airlifted to Northern Iraq. General Osman's brief news conference in Salahuddin was the first official appearance of American forces in the north.

The move apparently was intended to help dissuade Turkey from sending its own troops into Northern Iraq, where they would presumably clash with Kurdish soldiers. There have been conflicting reports about whether Turkish troops have crossed into Iraq.

Kurdish and American forces may initiate a joint ground attack in coming days against a militant Islamic group in Northern Iraq that the State Department says has ties to Al Qaeda.

THE COST OF WAR -- For the first time, the Bush administration is discussing the price tag of the war. President Bush plans to ask Congress for $63 billion to cover the military costs, $8 billion for postwar relief efforts, and $4 billion to upgrade domestic security. Those figures only cover the period through Sept. 30, the end of the federal government's fiscal year.

PATROLS OVER NEW YORK RESUMED -- Black Hawk helicopters from the Department of Homeland Security have begun 24-hour-a-day patrols over New York City in response to official warnings that the city is in special danger from terrorists. Officials said the start of patrols did not mean that a particular threat had been intercepted. Rather, one official said, it means that Al Qaeda continues to see New York as a prime target.

ARAB MEETING -- At its first meeting since the war against its member Iraq began, the 22-nation Arab League failed to come up with a consensus condemning the American-led invasion. Ministers urged the United Nations Security Council to stop the war, but did not indicate how to do that. The League also tried to prohibit any Arab state from participating in military operations against Iraq, a slap at the five Arab nations that are assisting the American war effort. The half-day meeting ended in discord, with the delegate from Qatar -- site of the coalition's central command -- simply walking out.

ANTHONY DePALMA
