

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD'S ARSENAL; White House Lists Iraq Steps To Build Banned Weapons
By Michael R. Gordon
Sept. 13, 2002

See the article in its original context from September 13, 2002, Section A, Page 13Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
Seeking to buttress the case for military action against Iraq, the Bush administration published a brief paper yesterday outlining what it says are efforts by Saddam Hussein to develop chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, and the missiles to deliver them.

Some senior Democratic lawmakers have complained that the Central Intelligence Agency has yet to deliver an updated National Intelligence Estimate documenting Iraq's military programs. They have also asserted that some of the intelligence that the administration has provided about Iraq's weapons activities is sketchy and out of date.

But the administration insists that despite Iraq's efforts to hide its activities to develop or acquire nonconventional weapons, Baghdad has shown a clear pattern of violating its commitments in all areas.

President Bush's speech yesterday at the United Nations and the new document -- a fact sheet, the White House calls it -- are intended to bolster the case for action by specifying how Iraq has violated its international pledges on arms and human rights since 1991.

In both the speech and the paper, the White House asserted that Iraq's efforts to buy specially configured aluminum tubes was evidence that President Hussein was still trying to make nuclear fuel for a bomb.

Senior officials acknowledged yesterday that there have been debates among intelligence experts about Iraq's intentions in trying to buy such tubes, but added that the dominant view in the administration was that the tubes were intended for use in gas centrifuges to enrich uranium.

George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, has been adamant that tubes recently intercepted en route to Iraq were intended for use in a nuclear program, officials said. They also said it was the intelligence agencies' unanimous view that the type of tubes that Iraq has been seeking are used to make such centrifuges.

The Defense Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency support the C.I.A. view, the officials said.

Although the C.I.A. position appears to be the dominant view, officials said some experts had questioned whether Iraq might not be seeking the tubes for other purposes, specifically, to build multiple-launch rocket systems.

Specifically, Washington officials said, some experts in the State Department and the Energy Department were said to have raised that question. But other, more senior, officials insisted last night that this was a minority view among intelligence experts and that the C.I.A. had wide support, particularly among the government's top technical experts and nuclear scientists.

''This is a footnote, not a split,'' a senior administration official said.

The government has shown great sensitivity about suggestions that intelligence experts differ over Iraq's intentions, because Mr. Hussein's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction is the centerpiece of the argument for planning a military campaign to topple him.

The New York Times reported on Sunday that the dominant view was that the tubes were for Iraq's nuclear program and that it was only one of several indications that Iraq was reconstituting and expanding its effort to acquire nuclear weapons.

The White House paper today also repeated the charges that Mr. Hussein's government was trying to develop mobile laboratories that could be used to make biological weapons.

On chemical weapons, the report said, Iraq is trying to buy ingredients that could be used to make poison gas. The fact sheet also said Iraq was trying to hide activities at its plant at Fallujah. Iraq, the report said, can make chlorine at Fallujah and three other plants.

Though Iraq claims that the production is to purify its water supply, the production capacity at the plants, the report said, is greater than Iraq needs for civilian purposes. The report says some of the chlorine supply is being diverted for military purposes.

On ballistic missiles, the report says Iraq is trying to develop missiles with a range of more than 90 miles, the upper limit established under the cease-fire after the Persian Gulf war in 1991. The report says Iraq has made preparations for testing the engines of prohibited longer-range missiles at its Al Rafah North complex.

Iraq has also rebuilt structures at Al Mamoun that were dismantled years ago at the insistence of United Nations weapons inspectors. The original structures were dismantled because they were intended to make solid-fuel engines for a long-range missile.

Regarding its nuclear programs, the report notes that Iraq has withheld documentation from the United Nations of its past nuclear program and relates that Mr. Hussein has repeatedly met his nuclear scientists in the last 14 months.

An administration official called discussions about the aluminum tubes and Iraq's intentions ''a normal part of the intelligence process.'' The administration has stopped Iraq several times from buying such tubes. Officials said yesterday that earlier shipments differed from latter ones and that the specifications of the earlier shipments were not as clearly suited for nuclear purposes.

''There are tubes and then there are tubes,'' the administration official said. He added that the best technical experts and nuclear scientists at laboratories like Oak Ridge supported the C.I.A. assessment.
