

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRUSSELS; European Nations Fall Short Of Consensus on Iraq Report
By John Tagliabue
Jan. 28, 2003

At the headquarters of the European Union today, foreign ministers of the 15 member nations even succeeded -- briefly -- in forging a common reaction to the reports by the chief United Nations weapons inspectors in Iraq, signing on to a statement drafted by the four members now sitting on the United Nations Security Council -- Britain, France, Germany and Spain.

But there, the unity ended, as Europe dissolved into its more common chorus -- some would say cacophony -- of voices.

Britain's foreign minister, Jack Straw, said the reports delivered to the Security Council in New York showed Iraq was engaged in a ''charade.''

''Saddam Hussein is not engaged in effective cooperation,'' Mr. Straw told reporters, ''If this failure to comply continues, then Iraq will have to face serious consequences.''


At the other end of the spectrum, Germany's foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, said bluntly, ''We don't want any military intervention.''

In Berlin, he was supported by Chancellor Gerhard Schröder.

''We are of the opinion that it is right what will probably be discussed and agreed on today, namely that inspectors will get more time for their work, '' Mr. Schröder, who has irritated Washington with his rejection of war, told reporters.

Earlier, in a speech, Mr. Schröder said: ''We do not share the opinion, that pressure -- especially in such an unstable region of the Near and Middle East -- can best or exclusively be applied with military means.''

Mr. Schröder's views enjoy strong support among Germans. This evening, several thousand people took to the streets in Berlin and Frankfurt to protest an Iraq war.

But Angela Merkel, the leader of the opposition Christian Democratic Union, dissented, saying Mr. Blix's report ''leaves open serious questions'' for Iraq to answer.

In Paris, President Jacques Chirac discussed the confrontation over Iraq with the Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Maher. A spokeswoman for Mr. Chirac said they shared an ''identical position.''

The spokeswoman, Catherine Colonna, said Mr. Chirac believed the inspectors should have all the time required. ''He supports a continuation of the work of the inspectors,'' she said, adding that the inspectors ''should be able to enjoy the full and entire cooperation of Iraq.''

Last week, Mr. Chirac and Mr. Schröder launched a joint appeal for a peaceful solution. Britain, by contrast, has supported the Bush administration and deployed thousands of troops to the Persian Gulf region.

Generally, the leaders of Italy, Spain, the Netherlands and Denmark have sided with President Bush. Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy is expected in Washington this week, and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain will meet Mr. Bush on Friday.

''If there has to be a war, better sooner than later,'' said Italy's minister for European Union policy, Rocco Buttiglione, although he added that ''we'd rather an international decision than unilateral action'' and that the ''best possibility is disarmament without war.''

Public opinion across Europe is ranged against war. Even in Britain, Mr. Blair finds himself somewhat isolated.

In Parliament, concern centers on the worry that Britain will simply follow the lead of Washington rather than determine its own way.

Some legislators said tonight that the inspectors should be given more time, and that Mr. Blair's mention on Sunday of ''weeks, not months'' was not sufficient.

Nick Palmer, a legislator from Mr. Blair's own Labor party, noted that the inspectors had asked for more time to reach a conclusion and said, ''Most people want Britain strongly to support that request.''

In Moscow, the deputy foreign minister, Yuri Y. Fedotov, told the Interfax news service tonight that Hans Blix, the chief of chemical and biological weapons inspectors, had delivered only an interim report, and that Iraq should have a chance to make good on recent promises to cooperate more fully with the inspection teams.

Even before the inspectors' report was released, Foreign Minister Igor S. Ivanov told the Arabic Jazeera television channel that American attack on Iraq without United Nations approval ''would deal a very heavy blow to the unity of the international community and the international antiterrorist coalition.''

''It would split this coalition,'' Mr. Ivanov said.

President Vladimir V. Putin appeared to have delivered much the same message to Mr. Blair today in a telephone conversation. The Kremlin said the two leaders had agreed that Iraq needed to meet its United Nations obligations in full, but added that Mr. Putin said the inspectors should continue their work.

In Turkey, officials continued their negotiations with their American counterparts on the size of the American military force that could be allowed to use their country as a base to launch an attack on Iraq, and on the amount of financial aid the Americans would offer in return.

Turkish leaders have agreed to allow the Americans to use Turkish bases as a springboard into Iraq, but they have asked American officials to scale back their initial request to bring 80,000 soldiers into the country.

A decision could come on Friday, when Turkey's national security council meets.
