
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE OPPOSITION; Ending Conference, Iraqi Dissidents Insist on Self-Government
By Judith Miller
March 3, 2003

Iraqi opposition leaders ended their first conference on Iraqi soil in 10 years today, insisting on the right of Iraqis to govern themselves if Saddam Hussein is ousted and creating a political framework for a post-liberation leadership.

Their four-page statement, issued late tonight, also opposed allowing Turkey to move military forces into northern Iraq, while expressing appreciation for American efforts to build the broadest possible coalition against Mr. Hussein.

Despite fierce debates over the statement's wording, which caused the meeting to drag on a day longer than planned, the communiqué was unanimously approved by the 54 members of the opposition group's 65-member steering committee who were present. Many of them traveled thousands of miles from far-flung exile to meet in this largely isolated enclave that Iraqi Kurds have effectively controlled since the early 1990's, when the United States established a no-flight zone that is off-limits to Iraqi forces.

''Power should be transferred to the Iraqi people and their true representatives as soon as possible,'' the statement said.

The wording reflected the dissidents' determined effort to bridge the vast political, ethnic and religious differences that have enabled critics to disparage them as fractious and ineffectual.

Compromises were made by all, delegates said, even by Zalmay Khalilzad, President Bush's special envoy, who lobbied unsuccessfully against the group's efforts to appoint a six-member group to serve as the nucleus of a post-Hussein government.

Seeking to allay concerns about a planned interim American military government to run the country once Mr. Hussein is overthrown, Mr. Khalilzad said such rule would not last a moment longer than needed to secure and stabilize Iraq.

''I want to tell the Iraqi people that help is on its way,'' he said.

The most contentious parts of the final statement concerned Turkey's declared intention to send troops into northern Iraq during a war, and the opposition of a militant Shiite group that is based in Iran, the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, to wording that would have ''welcomed'' the ouster of Mr. Hussein by American forces.

Delegates conferred late into the night, and Mr. Khalilzad shuttled among the new, relatively lavish Kurdish guesthouses trying to secure language that would not antagonize Turkey and further complicate American efforts to base United States forces there.

As the dissidents were finishing their final statement, the Turkish Parliament rejected the American proposal to base troops in Turkey, which would have opened the way to allowing the Turkish troops into northern Iraq.

Several Kurdish representatives said they hoped Turkey's action would prompt the United States to give their militias arms and a larger role in a possible war.

The past decade of relative autonomy has enabled the Kurds, a non-Arab minority in Iraq, to build a free and bustling -- if still poor and isolated -- enclave here. Kurds, whose villages were gassed and razed by Mr. Hussein, fear the loss of that autonomy in a war that might result in Turkish domination, or their reunification with a new central government in Baghdad.

The Kurds also remain suspicious of the United States, which betrayed Kurdish uprisings in 1975 and 1991. Though Kurdish groups say they want to remain within a federated Iraq, their leaders still fear that Washington might abandon them to secure access to Turkish bases.

A senior administration official said that any placement of Turkish troops in northern Iraq would be aimed at controlling its border and stopping refugee flows, confined to the border area and, above all, temporary.

But Massoud Barzani, the leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, the group that controls the enclave closest to the Turkish border, said after the meeting that his group rejected Turkish intervention even if Turkish troops were under American command. Yet the final statement contains softer criticism of Turkey than he had sought, and it does not explicitly reject a short period of American military rule in Iraq.

The opposition also succeeded in forming what it sees as the possible core of a post-Hussein government, despite initial objections from Mr. Khalilzad, who wants to avoid alienating Iraqis still living under Mr. Hussein's control.

The concept was promoted by Ahmad Chalabi, chairman of the Iraqi National Congress, the opposition umbrella group. The six-member leadership committee includes Mr. Chalabi, the two leaders of northern Iraq's Kurds, and a representative of the Iranian-based group, which says it represents Shiites. Over 60 percent of Iraqis belong to the Shiite branch of Islam. To satisfy Mr. Khalilzad, the opposition also appointed two Sunnis -- Ayad Alawi, a leader of the Iraqi National Accord, and Adnan Pachachi, a veteran diplomat and political independent, though it is doubtful that either will accept.

''The Iraqi opposition is now a full partner in the campaign of Iraqi liberation,'' said Hoshyar Zebari, a leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, referring to Mr. Khalilzad's endorsement of the meeting.

Mr. Chalabi agreed, adding, ''This is a great day for the Iraqi people.''
