

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 31, 2003; Battles in Central Iraq, Defiance in Baghdad and Quarrels in Washington
By Anthony Depalma
April 1, 2003

''We're in bad-guy country,'' an American marine declared when his unit had taken an Iraqi position on the way to Baghdad. After slowing their pace for a few days, American forces have started to push again toward the Iraqi capital, crossing into an area where the fighting is expected to turn uglier as the siege of the city draws nearer. And in several instances, over a tough day of fighting across Iraq, things did get uglier.

FIGHTING THE REPUBLICAN GUARD -- As punishing attacks on the dug-in Medina Division of the Iraqi Republican Guard continued, United States Army officers said they expect the decisive battle with Saddam Hussein's troops to come in a matter of days. At Central Command, Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks made clear the importance of that battle, saying the United States is prepared to ''pay a very high price'' in casualties to capture Baghdad.

Iraqi officials, sounding more pugnacious than ever, asserted that American and British troops were being soundly defeated in battle after battle. As Allied bombs shook Baghdad, the Iraqis vowed that ''those Americans who will not surrender to us will face nothing but death in the desert.''

All along the Euphrates River in southern Iraq battles raged, and a Republican Guard commander from a battalion that had been stationed north of Baghdad was captured near Hindiya, south of the city. Army officers said this could indicate a desperate attempt to shore up the defensive line facing the American forces.

SEVEN IRAQIS DIE AT CHECKPOINT -- A day after an Iraqi official warned that 4,000 suicide bombers would attack American forces, the United States Army announced that American soldiers had fired into a van that failed to stop at a checkpoint, killing seven Iraqi women and children. Army officials said a comprehensive investigation was under way. Officials indicated that soldiers of the Third Infantry Division at a checkpoint near Najaf were following established procedure yesterday afternoon when they motioned for the van to halt. When it did not stop, the soldiers fired warning shots, officials said, then took aim at the van's engine. ''As a last resort,'' an Army statement said, ''the soldiers fired into the passenger compartment of the vehicle.'' Thirteen woman and children were found to be in the vehicle. Seven were killed, two were wounded and four were not hurt.

DEFENDING THE PLAN -- Speaking to cheering Coast Guard employees at the port of Philadelphia, President Bush strongly defended the handling of the war in Iraq, asserting that considerable progress had been made in taking control of huge parts of the country and promising a clear victory.

''Day by day we are moving closer to Baghdad,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Day by day we are moving closer to victory.''

Concern continued to grow in Washington that underestimation of Iraqi willingness to fight and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's untested military doctrines had resulted in the launching of the American offensive with insufficient forces in Iraq. But all major figures in the administration insisted that American plans would ultimately prove successful. Meanwhile, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell scheduled meetings with leaders of Turkey and the European alliance to ease tensions caused by the start of the war and to confer on the postwar reconstruction of Iraq.

DISPUTE OVER AID -- The docks at the port of Umm Qasr in southern Iraq remained idle as a dispute over how to administer aid unfolded in Washington. The Pentagon insists on overseeing distribution of the food, water and medicine that is scheduled to come into Iraq. But Secretary of State Powell wants to keep the aid in civilian hands, fearing that any link with the military forces in Iraq would aggravate the perception that the American presence represented a forcible occupation of the country. Mr. Powell also argued that foreign governments and international aid organizations would be wary about lending a hand if the military was involved. The leaders of 14 major American aid agencies have urged President Bush to put the United Nations in charge of the relief effort. As the struggle for control continued, the aid remained on the docks.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
BROADCASTERS IN TROUBLE -- Peter Arnett was dismissed by NBC and Geraldo Rivera of Fox News was asked to leave Iraq by the Army, which threatened to remove him if he didn't go on his own. Mr. Arnett, whose reporting from Baghdad during the 1991 gulf war solidified his reputation as a premier war correspondent, was let go by the network after granting an interview with Iraqi TV in which he said that the American war plan had failed. National Geographic television, which also had been employing Mr. Arnett, terminated its contract as well.

Army officials complained that Mr. Rivera had broken ground rules for embedded journalists by reporting sensitive information, including troop movements, which he drew with a stick in the desert sands. 