
The World; Can Oil Pay for Iraq's Rebuilding? The U.S. Hopes So.
By Neela Banerjee
March 2, 2003

AMONG the arguments the Bush administration has offered to allay concerns about the cost of war in Iraq is that the United States would not have to pay for rebuilding the country after the shooting stops. The Iraqis themselves could manage that, the thinking goes, because they sit atop the world's second-largest oil reserves, after Saudi Arabia's.

''Detailed planning is underway for resumption of oil production as quickly as possible to meet the Iraqi people's basic needs,'' said Douglas J. Feith, under secretary of defense for policy, at a recent Senate Foreign Relations Committee hearing. ''The oil sector is Iraq's primary source of funding.''

But over the last few months, a growing chorus of experts, including oil industry and regional analysts, has questioned whether Iraq could count on that money anytime in the near future.

''It's simply a fantasy that Iraq has lots of oil, so therefore it will have lots of money,'' said James A. Placke, senior associate with Cambridge Energy Research Associates, a consulting firm, who spent 27 years as a United States diplomat, mainly in the Middle East.

Over the next 10 years, Iraqis may need about $250 billion to rebuild everything from power plants to social service programs, said Raad Alkadiri, a director at PFC Energy, a Washington consulting group. That does not include an estimated $50 billion over the same period to restore and expand the oil industry, he said.

Despite such concerns, the government still thinks oil will be the engine for Iraq's economic revival. ''The Iraqi economy is driven by oil,'' said Gregg W. Sullivan, a spokesman for the Near Eastern bureau of the State Department. ''We don't expect it to be an impoverished country for long.''

Twenty five years ago, before the Iran-Iraq war, Iraq could produce a maximum of about 3.5 million barrels a day. Today, its maximum capacity is about 2.8 million barrels a day, which still makes it the third largest producer in the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.

Iraq's oil industry has atrophied for several reasons. Two wars in two decades badly damaged its fields, and United Nations sanctions have reduced the flow of spare parts and technology.

''The oil sector in some ways is being held together by string and chewing gum,'' Mr. Alkadiri said. ''It's a testament to the skills of the technocrats that they managed to keep the oil pumping, but they have paid a tremendous cost as far the state of the oil fields.''

Mr. Placke estimated that revenues to Iraq from oil exports, legal and otherwise, were about $12 billion to $14 billion last year, but a war would likely further depress its production. And the possibility remains, despite Saddam Hussein's recent denials, that he might sabotage the oil facilities rather than allow them to be captured.

Even if the industry survives a war intact, ''many oil fields are in areas that are likely to be the biggest flash points, not just during the war, but as the United States tries to win the peace,'' Mr. Alkadiri said.

Kirkuk, a city in northern Iraq with rich oil fields around it, may turn into one of those flash points, regional experts fear. Long a Kurdish stronghold, Kirkuk has been resettled with growing numbers of Arabs sent from southern Iraq by Mr. Hussein. For 75 years, the Kurds have demanded control over Kirkuk's oil fields to have an independent source of money as the first step toward greater autonomy from Baghdad. In 1991, right after the gulf war, during an uprising, the Kurds wrecked the Kirkuk oil complex.

How would an impoverished Iraq restore its oil fields without outside aid? Industry analysts have noted that oil field service companies like Halliburton (where Vice President Dick Cheney was the chief executive officer before his nomination as vice president) and Schlumberger would likely be the first companies that could benefit from an effort to rebuild the industry, though certainly all the major oil companies are eager to work in Iraq.

Yet despite the lure of huge reserves, oil field service companies and others are unlikely to go in just because the United States desires a quick rebuilding of the industry. Oil executives have said that doing business in Iraq depends on whether they can be sure they can make money and whether the country affords them the legal protections to repatriate their profits -- guarantees that would take Iraq, coming out of war and decay, some time to develop.

''The oil companies more or less have the same structure of shareholders, which are 35 to 45 pension funds, and they need to be in line with what their shareholders think of investments around the world,'' a European oil executive said. ''Companies, whoever they are, are not going to pour $5 billion or $10 billion into Iraq without a stable government, a constitution, a central bank. These things need to be clarified before anything goes.''
