

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; U.S. Expects Iraqi Experts Will Be Taken Abroad for Questioning
By David E. Sanger
Jan. 14, 2003

The Bush administration expects that international inspectors will try to bring Iraqi scientists and engineers out of the country starting next week to interview them about weapons programs, according to American and European officials familiar with the plans.

The interviews, officials say, may be conducted on Cyprus or at United Nations facilities in Europe. They are being timed to get information from the scientists before the reports to the United Nations on Jan. 27 by Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, who are directing the search for chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programs.

With the approach of the inspectors' report to the Security Council, the pace of inspections is increasingly becoming a central issue. While the administration is pushing for a faster clip, other Security Council members and the inspectors themselves are calling for patience.

In recent days, several European officials and members of the Security Council have said they could not back any military action against Iraq without the discovery of weapons of mass destruction, or evidence that President Saddam Hussein is blocking the inspectors.

Today Dr. ElBaradei, director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said the teams ''still need a few months to achieve our mission.''

His counterpart, Hans Blix, the chief weapons inspector, affirmed that he did not see Jan. 27 as a deadline. ''We can see a lot of work ahead of us beyond that date if we are allowed to do so,'' he said.

So far the inspections have yielded almost no new information. In hopes of speeding things up, American intelligence officials have put together a list of approximately 100 scientists and engineers who they believe are central to the weapons programs, and they are pressing the inspectors to bring willing scientists and their families to a place outside Mr. Hussein's control.

''The idea is to make sure that life starts getting a lot hotter for Saddam in the next few weeks,'' said one official familiar with the plans. ''This is how we will know whether we are getting cooperation or a pattern of noncooperation. This should give us a much better picture.''

But American officials are far from sure that the effort will work. Under United Nations Resolution 1441, the scientists must leave voluntarily, and Mr. Blix has often warned that the inspectors are not in what he once called ''the abduction business.'' Exactly how the scientists and their families would be taken out of Iraq is something of a mystery.

American officials have been adamant that the operation be run by the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency, to counter Iraqi accusations that the inspections are being run by American intelligence.

But after the interviews are over, the scientists will most likely be placed into the equivalent of a witness protection program, or offered residency in the United States or other countries.

If the scientists refuse to leave Iraq, or if they seem to be intimidated by Mr. Hussein, the administration would try to cast the issue as another ''material breach'' of the United Nations resolution. Washington has argued that Mr. Hussein's 12,000-page ''declaration'' about his military programs in December was such a breach because it omitted information about programs that inspectors had previously detected.

From well before the arrival of the first inspectors in Baghdad, Mr. Bush's top national security aides said they held out little hope that the teams would find much at the sites they had monitored before to their withdrawal from the country in 1998.

Success or failure, they predicted, would depend on defections. But so far there do not appear to have been many. Mr. Blix has always seemed hesitant, worried either that the scientists would not come, or that they would fear retaliation against their extended families and friends. ''We cannot force anybody to go abroad or force them to defect,'' Mr. Blix said Thursday.

In an interview today with the BBC, Mr. Blix said again that the practical arrangements were a complicated matter, and that he did not want to undertake interviews until all the details were worked out.

Dr. ElBaradei has been more open to the idea, and some American officials feel his group may move first by trying to bring nuclear scientists out of Iraq.

''We know more about the chemical and biological programs, and we know more about those scientists,'' said one administration official. ''It's harder on the nuclear side.''

But Mr. Bush's aides say the political impact of a discovery that Mr. Hussein has a hidden nuclear weapons program would be much greater.

At the White House today, Ari Fleischer, the press secretary, said Mr. Bush ''has no timetable'' in mind.

He also said Mr. Bush believed there was no point to using diplomacy with Mr. Hussein, while he believed diplomacy would work with North Korea.

Mr. Fleischer later amended his comment, saying Mr. Bush ''was not optimistic'' about the success of a diplomatic solution in Iraq.
