
A NATION AT WAR: OPPOSITION GROUPS; Fear Said to Be Keeping Iraqi Dissidents From Rebelling
By Marc Santora
March 26, 2003

American forces have been making a point in recent days of encouraging the citizens of Iraq to rise up and fight the government of Saddam Hussein.

Today, there were reports that Shiite Muslim civilians in the southern city of Basra had begun to resist the Iraqi authorities. The extent of any uprising could not be verified.

But the uprisings were not as large as had been expected. This afternoon several members of Iraqi opposition groups met with military and administration officials to explain why the uprisings had not occurred in the south.

The explanation was a simple one. The people in Basra ''live in fear,'' said Sheik al-Hatami, leader of an Iraqi opposition group, who said he was in contact with people in Basra. ''The moment the security apparatus of the country crumbles, the people will rise up.''

Maj. Gen. Peter Wall, second in command of British troops, said Basra's civilians were out in the streets ''in significant numbers'' and were being ''less compliant'' with Mr. Hussein's government.

At the same time, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld was answering questions at home on the same subject.

''I am very reluctant to run around the world encouraging people to rise up,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''People will rise up. But let there be no doubt: these are a repressed people. And -- but I hope and pray they'll do it at a time when there are sufficient forces nearby to be helpful to them rather than at a time where it simply costs their life and it's a wasted life.''

He added, ''Anyone who's engaged in an uprising has a whole lot of courage, and I sure hope they're successful.''

Sheik Hatami said that in the days before the American-led attack on Iraq, Mr. Hussein established something close to martial law in Basra, trying to prevent a repeat of the uprisings that occurred in 1991.

The civilian population of Basra was given six months of food rations and put under curfew. Loyalist fedayeen soldiers were rushed from Baghdad to threaten execution of those who ignored the curfew, Sheik Hatami said.

His account was based in part on a conversation today with someone in the city. With Basra inaccessible, independent verification of his account was impossible. Sheik Hatami fled Iraq in 1970 and makes his home in Canada, but he is in Kuwait now.

Elements of the regular Iraqi Army as well as irregular forces were controlling the center of Iraq's second largest city, home to 1.5 million people, but British troops were on the outskirts, poised to begin what they described today as a new and more aggressive campaign to root out those loyal to the government.

The residents of Basra are mainly Shiites, who make up 60 percent of Iraq's population but who have been brutally repressed under Mr. Hussein's rule.

The allied forces had hoped that the Shiites would repeat the uprisings of 1991 against Mr. Hussein's Baath Party apparatus and welcome them. But that has not happened, and conditions in the city have deteriorated sharply.

The situation is complicated, said people who had been in contact with civilians in Basra, experts on the Shiite population in Iraq and accounts by reporters who recently traveled in the area.

Fear is a factor. But it is compounded by memories of President George Bush's call during the first Persian Gulf war for ''the Iraqi people to take matters into their own hands and force Saddam Hussein, the dictator, to step aside.''

Many Shiites in the south and Kurds in the north followed that advice, only to be brutally crushed while America failed to help them.

''They had a bad experience with the Americans, and they paid dearly for it,'' said Dr. Abdul-Reda A. Assiri, a Kuwait University professor.

He said people wanted to be sure the allies were going to finish the job. The initial military strategy of surrounding Basra and then hoping the Iraqis would invite them in may have contributed to the impression that the invading armies were not coming to help them.

Many young people who grew up under the economic penalties imposed on the country after the first gulf war blame America for the harsh conditions they have had to endure, Dr. Assiri said.

''You have to remember,'' he said. ''Saddam has a very sophisticated propaganda machine.''

Sheik Hatami said Mr. Hussein had long been preparing for war with America.

He said Mr. Hussein had tried to supplement his control over the military by paying local tribal leaders to fight on his behalf and by punishing dissenters.

In order to convince tribal leaders that it is acceptable to break with Mr. Hussein, Sheik Hatami said he was working with other clerics outside Iraq to issue a religious edict saying such action would be legitimate.

Even if uprisings do eventually begin, it remains to be seen how American troops will be viewed, especially if the military campaign drags on.
