

THREATS AND RESPONSES: REACTION; With Its Nuances, Iraq Report Can't Resolve U.N. Stalemate
By Richard Bernstein
Feb. 15, 2003

If the United Nations inspectors had a little bit for everybody in their reports today, they did not have enough of anything to resolve the stalemate in the Security Council, European analysts and political figures said.

They viewed the inspectors' reports of modestly improved cooperation by Iraq as providing encouragement to those who are opposed to war, further isolating the United States and Britain as the only two Security Council members favoring imminent military action.

The inspectors' rebukes to Iraq for still failing to cooperate also indicated to some that the United States might go to war even without Security Council approval, but others believed that the pressure on Washington to wait at least a few more weeks would also become stronger.

''It's an impasse all over again,'' said Henning Riecke, a security and defense policy expert at the German Council on Foreign Relations. ''France and Germany see improvements as reasons not to use military force. Spain, Britain and the U.S. see further deceptions.''

''The only two possible ways forward are either some kind of compromise solution, a new tougher 1441, or U.S. action without the U.N. ,'' said Mr. Riecke, referring to the Security Council resolution that orders Iraq to comply with weapons inspections. ''It all depends on whether there is some will to compromise.''

The reports today by Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief weapons inspectors, came as emotions in Europe were heightened over the possibility of a war against Iraq. Antiwar demonstrations are expected across Europe on Saturday, and if millions take to the streets, as organizers have said they will, there will be little incentive for antiwar governments like the German and the French to relax their opposition to military action.

''I think it is clear from Hans Blix's report that there is a significant degree of cooperation and that there's no ground for war,'' said John Rees, a member of the the Stop the War Coalition in Britain. ''Hans Blix went out of his way to say that some of the evidence'' presented by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell ''did not sustain the accusation that Iraq was trying to hide weapons of mass destruction.''

This view was echoed in Britain by several parliamentary figures.

Charles Kennedy, the leader of the Liberal Democrats, said that based on the evidence so far, it was imperative that Britain wait for a United Nations mandate before supporting military action in Iraq. He also told the BBC that progress was being made by Mr. Blix's team.

Another prominent Liberal Democrat, Menzies Campbell, the party's foreign affairs spokesman, said, ''So long as the inspectors believe that they can continue to fulfill their responsibilities towards the U.N. Security Council, it cannot be said that all alternative diplomatic and political options have been exhausted.''

Tam Dalyell, a Labor member of Parliament, said: ''There is absolutely not a shred of an excuse for launching a military attack on the basis of this report. Not a shred.'' Speaking of the Labor government, he said, ''Even by their own criteria it would be wicked, wicked, wicked if they were to plunge us into war on the basis of that.''

In France, analysts felt that the United States and Britain had lost ground in the debate. ''It wasn't a good day for the United States, but a good one for Saddam and France,'' said Dominique Moisi, deputy director of the French Institute of International Relations in Paris.

Still, Mr. Moisi felt that while the inspectors' reports might slow the movement toward war, they would not stop it. ''The war time line may have been modified but the ultimate outcome remains the same: war,'' he said. ''In the end, what's going to happen is that you're going to get a divided international community. The antiwar group is winning a few battles, but it isn't winning the war.''

Jacques Beltran, an expert on trans-Atlantic relations at the same institute as Mr. Moisi, said, ''We are really in a period of crisis.'' He added that if ''the United States decides all the same to go ahead and intervene alone, it is the U.N. itself that will really be at stake.''

In Germany, where Chancellor Gerhard Schröder has come under intense criticism from conservatives and the news media for damaging relations with the United States, opposition figures called on the government to change its stance.

The report shows that Iraq ''has not fully cooperated,'' Angela Merkel, the chairwoman of the conservative Christian Democratic Union, said. ''The pressure must be raised further. Time is running out.''

But Katrin Göring-Eckart, the Greens' parliamentary leader, said, ''The information confirms the position of the German government, that the United Nations inspectors should be given more time.''

''I call on the C.D.U. to revise its war policy and place itself on the side of those who are fighting for a peaceful solution,'' she said.
