

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 25, 2003; Heavy Losses Among Iraqis, Hints of an Uprising, and the British in Basra
By Anthony Depalma
March 26, 2003

In one of the fiercest battles of the war so far, American forces confronted Iraqi foot soldiers in the desert about 100 miles south of Baghdad, killing hundreds. The strategic focus of the war was shifted temporarily from Baghdad back to southern Iraq, where there were signs of an incipient Iraqi rebellion in Basra. American and British forces revised their war plans, concentrating on Iraqi strongholds that had been bypassed on the initial dash into Iraq.

BATTLE AT NAJAF -- American soldiers from the Seventh Cavalry of the Third Infantry Division were attacked near Najaf, American officials said. Swirling sandstorms prevented the Americans from calling in air cover. Officials estimated the number of Iraqi soldiers killed at 150 to 500. There was no word of any American casualties. On Wednesday, large explosions were heard on the southern edge of Baghdad, and smoke was reported rising from the area where the Ministry of Information and the state-run television system are located.

BRITISH ARMY IN BASRA -- British forces launched a series of commando raids and artillery attacks around the outskirts of Basra in advance of an attempt to seize control of the city from about 1,000 irregular Iraqi forces loyal to Saddam Hussein and recruited by his son. Such resistance from the fedayeen and other fanatical militia groups has forced allied commanders to adjust their war plans and neutralize the southern cities before making the final all-out assault on Baghdad. Military officials said the new plan would delay the battle for Baghdad for days, not weeks.

British warplanes bombed the Baath Party headquarters in Basra and commandos captured the ''most senior'' party official. British military officials said an unknown number of the 1.5 million residents of the city attacked Iraqi soldiers and paramilitary loyalists in the first signs of a popular uprising.

AIR WAR -- American and British bombers flew 1,400 missions across Iraq. Their primary target was a Republican Guard division outside Baghdad that stood in the way of American ground troops. Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, said attacks by air on the Medina Division of the Republican Guard were a preliminary step before a full-scale tank assault in the coming days.

WAR CRIMES -- Senior White House and Pentagon officials are accusing Iraq of war crimes, including the public execution of several Army mechanics who were captured over the weekend in Nasiriya. The White House also said Iraqi paramilitary forces were delaying the delivery of food and water into Basra.

IRAQI CASUALTIES -- The Pentagon reported that the Third Infantry had killed about 300 Iraqi fighters in the last stages of its march on Baghdad. American and British forces have taken about 3,500 Iraqi prisoners.

CLEARING THE PORT -- While Basra remains blocked, American and British forces worked to clear the port of Umm Qasr so supplies could start to be delivered. United States Navy officials said four mine-sniffing dolphins were used to clear the Khor Abdullah waterway leading to the port so the first aid ship, Sir Galahad, can dock and unload.

GLOOM IN BAGHDAD -- Even at midday, Baghdad was almost dark, shrouded with thick smoke from oil-filled trenches deliberately set on fire by Iraqi forces to interfere with American remote guidance systems. Streets in the capital were all but deserted as residents watched and waited for the ground assault to begin.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
SANDSTORM -- A monster sandstorm with high winds and blinding clouds of dust forced some American troops to dig in but provided cover for others to move into position for an assault on Baghdad. Meteorologists say the storm is expected to end Wednesday and bad weather should not return for a week or two.

COMMUNICATIONS CAMPAIGN -- Missions by special operations forces destroyed so much of Iraq's military communications that Baghdad has been forced to send orders to field commanders by cars, cabs and runners. But other lines of communications have been deliberately spared so that American intelligence officials can send e-mail messages and make cellular telephone calls to persuade high-ranking Iraqi officials to defect. Officials say the strategy has not worked as planned because few Iraqis are ready to turn against Mr. Hussein unless they are certain he is dead or has been removed from power.

REBUILDING RELATIONS -- Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain said that when he meets with President Bush on Wednesday he will discuss the military campaign in Iraq and the need to rebuild relations between the United States and Europe. Expressing concern about how deteriorated relations might hamper the postwar reconstruction of Iraq, Mr. Blair said it was important for the United States and Europe to work again as partners. Mr. Blair, who has been President Bush's staunchest ally, also said that the United Nations should be thoroughly involved in helping Iraq recover and install a new government. 