
Rumsfeld, at Base Near Iraq, Warns Sponsors of Terror
By Thom Shanker
June 10, 2002

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld crossed the Kuwaiti desert to an American base near Iraq today and issued a pointed warning to any nation that acquires weapons of mass destruction and plans to strike a bargain with terrorists for their use in an attack.

''The global war on terrorism began in Afghanistan, to be sure, but it will not end there,'' Mr. Rumsfeld told 1,000 cheering troops at Camp Doha, a sprawling base constructed of cement and steel siding in the same sandy hues as the desert stretching 35 miles to the Iraqi border.

''It will not end until terrorist networks have been rooted out from wherever they exist,'' he said. ''And it will not end until state sponsors of terror are made to understand that abetting terrorism is unacceptable and will have deadly consequences for the regimes that do so.''

Mr. Rumsfeld arrived in Kuwait today on the first of three stops in Persian Gulf states that would be crucial in mounting any military operation against Iraq.

Although he stressed that his mission was to thank Kuwait, Bahrain and Qatar for their support in Afghanistan, and not to talk of war with Baghdad, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq played the role of the shunned neighbor who by his absence dominates all conversation at a summer barbecue.

Several of the American troops who left the 110-degree desert afternoon for the cool of a base gymnasium and the rally with Mr. Rumsfeld asked about the next offensive in the campaign against terrorism and whether Iraq was to be the target.

Mr. Rumsfeld rejected all questions about future operations, saying of any decision, ''That's for presidents.''

But a senior Defense Department official, speaking before Mr. Rumsfeld's arrival here, expressed little doubt that the question of Iraq would be on the agenda during each of the secretary's meetings in the trio of gulf states.

''We're not at the stage where we're soliciting allies or something like that,'' the official said. ''But these issues may come up. All these countries live in the gulf. They have both Iran and Iraq as neighbors. And it would not be surprising if this was discussed.''

About 2,000 troops, mostly of United States Army, are stationed here at Camp Doha, home to Abrams tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles, Patriot air-defense batteries and the forward headquarters of Lt. Gen. Paul T. Mikolashek of the Army, who commands all ground forces assigned to the United States Central Command in a swath of the globe from Egypt to Pakistan.

In all, about 8,000 American troops are based in Kuwait, including the crews for the F-15 and F-16 warplanes that enforce the no-flight zone over southern Iraq.

''You are the people who stand between freedom and fear, between our people and a dangerous adversary that cannot be appeased, cannot be ignored and cannot be allowed to win,'' Mr. Rumsfeld told the troops.

But as he enters talks with Kuwaiti leaders, Mr. Rumsfeld is aware that, publicly at least, they remain less than eager about joining a new coalition to oust Mr. Hussein.

During an Arab League summit meeting in March, Kuwait and Iraq reached a rapprochement. Iraq recognized Kuwait's sovereignty and pledged not to invade again -- but only in exchange for a declaration that any attack on Iraq would be considered an attack against all Arab nations.

Bush administration officials say they can wholly depend on Kuwait, whose very survival after Iraq's invasion in 1990 is owed to American military power marshaled by the president's father.

When asked by reporters to gauge support among American allies in the region for a march to Baghdad by the American military, Mr. Rumsfeld replied: ''I'm not going to get into the subject of an attack on Iraq. That's not why I'm here.'' He added, ''The cooperation we have been receiving, we are currently receiving and, I have every reason to say, we will be receiving from the countries in the region that we're going to be visiting today and tomorrow, has been terrific.''

A number of senior Bush administration officials, among them Vice President Dick Cheney and Mr. Rumsfeld, contend that Arab leaders would protest in public but celebrate in private if the United States undertook military action to oust Mr. Hussein -- so long as the operation was decisive, their aides say.

But others in the administration, particularly some at the State Department, say an attack on Iraq would be seen as a confrontation with Islam worldwide, damaging Israeli-Palestinian peace prospects, bringing further unrest to the region and undermining support for battling Osama bin Laden and his network, Al Qaeda.

The Iraqi news media, in anticipation of Mr. Rumsfeld's arrival in the region, denounced the visit. The Iraqi Army daily, Al Qadissiya, said Mr. Rumsfeld's tour was to promote ''evil intentions toward Iraq,'' but it said the Bush administration's policies ''are doomed.''
