

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ISTANBUL; Turkey Backs United States Plans for Iraq
By Dexter Filkins
Feb. 6, 2003

The prime minister of Turkey declared his government's support today for America's plans for military action in Iraq, saying he would ask Parliament later this month to open the country's bases to thousands of American combat troops, Turkish reporters said.

According to the notes of reporters who attended the meeting, which was barred to foreign reporters, Prime Minister Abdullah Gul said his government had all but given up on diplomatic efforts to disarm Iraq and had decided to join the United States in its plans to confront Iraq by military means.

''We believe that in line with our national interests, we should act together with our strategic ally, the United States,'' Mr. Gul said, according to the reporters who attended the meeting, held in the capital, Ankara. ''It was a very hard decision. We had sleepless nights, but there was nothing left to be done for a peaceful solution.''

Mr. Gul said he would ask Parliament on Feb. 18 to pass a resolution granting the Turkish government broad authority to permit American troops to use bases in the country to attack Iraq. Mr. Gul spoke on the eve of a parliamentary vote on whether to permit American engineers to begin improving Turkish bases for possible use by American troops.

A senior member of Mr. Gul's Justice and Development Party, which has a comfortable majority in the National Assembly, said party leaders were confident that both resolutions would pass without difficulty. Turkish public opinion is running overwhelmingly against the country's involvement in a war with Iraq, but leaders said they thought the people would support the decision.

''We have spoken to our party members, and we don't expect any problems,'' a senior member of the Justice and Development Party said.

Mr. Gul's remarks today appeared to end weeks of anguished debate among Turkey's leaders over whether to grant American troops permission to use their bases.

The United States has been pressing Turkey's leaders for months to permit as many as 80,000 American troops to use bases in Turkey, which has a 150-mile border with Iraq. Mr. Gul appeared to accede to the American requests just hours before Secretary of State Colin L. Powell took the floor at the United Nations to set forth the apparent basis for imminent American military action.

Turkey, a secular Muslim democracy and a member of NATO, occupies a unique place in the crisis over Iraq. Turkish leaders -- including the traditionally influential military -- have told American officials privately that they had long wanted to support the United States, and that they ultimately would, but that they have been restrained by Turkish popular opinion against becoming involved in a war.

Turkish leaders and the Turkish people have said they did not want to repeat the experience of the Persian Gulf war in 1991, when Turkey was flooded with more than a half-million Iraqi refugees.

American commanders want to use Turkey as a launching pad to move into northern Iraq. They say such a campaign would tie up Iraqi forces and so speed an American victory for the main attacking force flowing out of Kuwait.

In recent days, American officials have expressed impatience with the Turkish government and hinted that they were on the verge of cutting Turkey out of their military plans. Mr. Gul's statements followed a diplomatic blitz by American officials this week; on Tuesday, Mr. Gul spoke at length over the telephone with Vice President Dick Cheney.

''We have done whatever we can to have a peaceful solution, but now is the time to protect our national interests,'' Mr. Gul told the Turkish reporters.

A Western diplomat who said he had heard a summary of Mr. Gul's remarks said he was encouraged by the direction of Mr. Gul's government. ''A very positive thing,'' the diplomat said.

There have been few sizable public demonstrations against war in Iraq. Many Turks say they would like nothing more than to see Saddam Hussein ousted from Iraq, and in recent days, a number of journalists and business leaders warned of lasting damage to the crucial alliance with America.

''War is bad. War is cruel,'' Ilnur Cevik, editor of the Turkish Daily News wrote in a column this week. ''Yet when it is at your doorstep and it becomes inevitable, you have to take the necessary steps to ride out the ordeal with minimum damage.''

There were signs, however, of significant opposition to the measure in the Turkish Parliament.

The leader of Turkey's main opposition party said tonight that its members would oppose both the proposals to permit the Americans to upgrade Turkish bases and to permit American troops. Inal Batu, a senior member of the Republican People's Party, said the Americans were forcing Turkey's leaders to act, noting the American influence over the International Monetary Fund, which agreed last year to lend Turkey $16 billion.
