

Iraq Factor Complicates Euro Issue For Britain
By Alan Cowell
Feb. 19, 2003

With many Britons troubled by the prospect of their soldiers fighting in Iraq, new uncertainties have arisen over Prime Minister Tony Blair's chances of maintaining his schedule for Britain's entry into the euro currency.

Euro membership has long been an issue preoccupying Mr. Blair and his chancellor, Gordon Brown, who is believed to be far less enthusiastic about the euro than the prime minister. But with increasing momentum toward war in Iraq, analysts and economists have begun to see signals that Mr. Blair may have less room to maneuver in persuading skeptical Britons to support membership in the single currency.

''There's no upside link between Iraq and the euro, except that if Tony Blair survives Iraq unscathed, his self-confidence is not going to diminish,'' said Charles Grant, who is the director of the Center for European Reform, a research institute that is based in London. ''But if Iraq goes wrong, then there won't be a referendum on joining the euro in this Parliament.''

Mr. Blair's official stand is to decide by June whether to hold a referendum on the euro before the next parliamentary elections, which could be held at the latest in June 2006. He and Mr. Brown are supposed to make the decision based on five economic tests, and Mr. Blair told a news conference here today that this policy had not changed.

But opponents of the euro pointed to different signals from Brussels, where Mr. Brown presented a report to European finance ministers today criticizing what he termed the inflexibility and lack of competitiveness in the euro zone, where economic growth has been markedly more sluggish than in Britain.

The report was endorsed by Mr. Blair, encouraging critics of the euro to suggest that the two men had agreed to sideline the issue on the grounds that the British and Continental European economies were too far apart for Britain to join the euro.

The five economic tests set out to answer the question of whether membership in the slow-growing euro zone -- and the loss of control over interest rates -- would benefit the faster-growing and more flexible economy in Britain, where unemployment is much lower but interest rates are significantly higher. Those differences could be interpreted as meaning that the Continental and British economies are not converging in a way that would promote British membership in the monetary union.

Mr. Brown has also taken to criticizing the euro zone's economic management and the pace of overhauling labor practices and job creation. Along with Sweden and Denmark, Britain has remained outside the euro zone of 12 European economies.

At his news conference today, Mr. Blair acknowledged, ''We have not made as much progress on economic reform as we should have, and that is the blunt truth.''

Pro-euro campaigners argued, however, in the words of Philippe Legrain, chief economist of the Britain in Europe campaign: ''Anti-Europeans cannot comfort themselves with the myth that Britain is a beacon and the rest of Europe is a basket case. Nor should they be allowed to use this report as yet another pretext for their narrow-minded opposition to the euro.''

The anti-euro camp, by contrast, took heart from a new opinion survey for Barclays Capital showing that opposition to the euro among Britons had widened, with 61 percent saying they oppose losing the pound compared with 24 percent in favor, if a referendum were held today. The difference between pro-euro and anti-euro respondents was the widest since the monthly surveys began in 2001, Barclays Capital said.

''The increase in anti-euro sentiment has coincided with a drop in support for the Labor Party, and this is largely due to the unpopular stance on the Iraq issue,'' said Nick Verdi, an economist with Barclays Capital.

Many people believe that Mr. Blair will not risk a referendum he knows he will lose.

Even pro-euro campaigners acknowledge that a unsettling outcome of the Iraq campaign would throw their calculations to the wind.

''Blair is completely tied up with Iraq at the moment,'' said Graham Bishop, a pro-euro independent economist. ''If that goes wrong then Blair may be, sad to say, history, and who knows what comes thereafter?''

Mr. Bishop argued though that, in Britain ''more than 50 or 60 percent of the people are soft in the middle'' in their views on the euro and could well be persuaded by Mr. Blair to favor the single currency ''if he comes out with a halo from Iraq'' vindicated by a quick and effective war.

Many Britons did not realize, Mr. Bishop said, that the European Union was moving ahead toward enlargement of its membership and a new constitutional framework. So, ultimately, he said the euro debate ''has nothing to do with notes and coins; it has to do with whether the people of Britain want to be part of Europe.''
