

STATE OF THE UNION: IRAQ; Hussein Under Growing Fire in Arab Lands; War Called Inevitable
By Neil MacFarquhar
Jan. 29, 2003

Even as some senior Arab officials were suggesting today that arms inspectors in Iraq be given more time, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt began preparing his country for what he called an inevitable conflict.

In a change reflected across the Arab world, more bellicose attacks against Saddam Hussein could be heard today, blaming his megalomania for any horrors lying ahead.

At the same time, there is scant support in the Arab world for an American-led attack on Iraq, largely because nobody believes that Washington will fulfill whatever post-Hussein vision it is now promoting.

As evidence, commentators pointed to the re-election of Ariel Sharon as Israel's prime minister, with his expected further crackdown on Palestinians, in tandem with the utter lack of progress toward the Palestinian state that the Bush administration maintains it supports.

''If the U.S. was serious about launching a wave of political change toward democracy, it should solve the Israeli conflict first,'' said Kamal Hamdan, a Lebanese economist. ''While we watch this tragedy unfolding in Palestine, we see 200,000 soldiers preparing to attack Iraq with no guarantee of solving any problem.''

President Mubarak, in an interview with a Persian Gulf newspaper that was splashed across the front pages at home, said the likelihood of war was as clear as an open book. ''The strike is coming, coming unless Iraq abides by the resolutions of the international legitimacy and unless it stops putting obstacles in front of international arms inspectors,'' he told Al Itihad, a United Arab Emirates newspaper.

Mr. Mubarak said he had sent messages to President Saddam Hussein warning him against the coming carnage, much as he had in 1990 after the Iraqi leader invaded Kuwait.

''I called or wrote him 32 times warning him of the dangers of his position, but he ignored those calls and warnings,'' the president said.

The Egyptian press has joined in the chorus of accusations against Mr. Hussein. A cartoon over the weekend in the semiofficial daily Al Ahram showed him flexing his biceps, which are drawn as a time bomb. The newspaper's editor, Ibrahim Nafie, reviewed the history of Mr. Hussein's troubled relations with the Arab world.

''He remains the same man who plunged his country into war after war and who used weapons of mass destruction against Iranian forces and against his own people,'' the editor wrote. ''The Iraqi leader pushes the situation to the brink with cries of defiance and without the slightest thought for the welfare of his country or his people.''

An editorial in the weekly magazine Akher Saa suggested that Mr. Hussein was stalling for time in hopes of outmaneuvering the inspectors. ''We wish that the Iraqi leadership would listen to the voice of wisdom in order to clear the dark cloud that overshadows Baghdad and threatens an unpredictable catastrophe,'' the editorial said.

Similar editorials began appearing in other Arab newspapers, with some commentators suggesting that the theme would be adopted by all Arab nations as they begin to walk the line between what their Washington patrons want and publics fed up with what they see as repeated humiliation at the hands of the United States.

''All of them are preparing, but at the end of the day they will all blame Saddam,'' said Oraib Rantawi, a columnist for Dustour, a Jordanian daily.

Laying the blame on Mr. Hussein does not translate directly into supporting Washington's position, however. ''The Saudi papers are doing their best lately to say that Saddam is horrible,'' said a senior Saudi official. ''But saying that Saddam is horrible is quite different from saying that America is justified in taking him out.''

That will be the difficult stance that most Arab governments will try to follow for the duration of any war, Arab analysts believe, blaming Mr. Hussein for the conflagration while trying not to side too openly with Washington.

''Today Saddam is winning every day in the court of public opinion,'' said Muhammad Kamal, a professor of political science at Cairo University, noting that Arab governments would have a tough sell in trying to blame Mr. Hussein. ''Everyone thinks he is cooperating even if he is not,'' he said. ''But there is no other argument. What else can they say?''

In the meantime, Egypt dispatched a high-powered delegation to the Unit ed States, including Gamal Mubarak, the president's son, to argue publicly against a war while evidently hoping Washington will do something to ease the deepening economic problems that Egypt will most likely face.

In New York, Osama el-Baz, President Mubarak's chief policy adviser, asserted that an attack on Iraq would lead to more radicalization, rather than more liberalization, of politics in the Middle East. The immediate consequences in Iraq, he said in an interview with reporters and editors of The New York Times, would be ''either chaos, or lack of hope.''
