

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; A Diverse Band of Volunteers Sends a Warning to America
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 5, 2003

There were only a few spectators in the stands today for the huge military parade on a hilltop here. It did not matter, though. The real audience was not in this northern city, near the border with the nominally independent Kurdish zone, but elsewhere.

''Today we are here to show the Americans that we will stand strong against all aggression against Iraq,'' said Abdullah Jamin Ahmed, 50, a retiree with a gray mustache and an AK-47 leaning against his left shoulder.

This was not the first parade, in recent months, of the Jerusalem Army, a civilian militia that claims seven million members around Iraq, but it appeared to be the largest. Perhaps 50,000 militia members -- men, women, the old and big-bellied as well as the young and trim -- marched here to prove that ordinary Iraqis are armed and ready to fight if the United States carries out its threat to attack Iraq.

Whether they actually will fight remains one of the biggest questions facing American war planners. But, at a minimum, the march here showed that, on the eve of a possible war, Saddam Hussein's government has the power to bring out big crowds, and that there is no shortage of weapons in this country, which has made few public displays of war preparations so far.

Muhammed Hassan, 22, a farmer who had pinned to his chest a sign reading, ''Down with America,'' was one of 200 militia members from Rabia -- the entire adult male population of his small village about an hour's drive from here. Like most people at the march and elsewhere in Iraq, he showed little anger or fervor, but no fear either.

''It's a challenge,'' he said of the size of the crowd today. ''I am not afraid. I will fight them.''

The Jerusalem Army was formed two years ago by the government, largely from the loyal cadre of Mr. Hussein's ruling Baath Party, to show solidarity with Palestinians. Its members, some former soldiers, receive military training, which many said had been increased in recent weeks as an American decision nears on whether to attack Iraq.

Today, they showed their strength. Unit after armed unit -- Kurds in baggy pants, Baath Party officials in smart green jumpsuits, young men with launchers for rocket-propelled grenades -- passed by the reviewing stand not far from the ruins of an ancient Assyrian wall. Some chanted in Arabic: ''Bush, Bush, hear our refrain. We support Saddam Hussein.''

Tailing along at the end of the parade were dozens of white pickup trucks mounted with machine guns, reminiscent of the so-called technicals who challenged American troops in Somalia.

There also appeared to be a new twist today: a unit of a dozen suicide bombers, dressed in white hoods and with explosive belts and what looked like dynamite draped from their bodies. Iraqi officials warned recently that they would unleash suicide attacks against Americans in the event of an attack, not only in Iraq but elsewhere in the Middle East.

To underscore the importance of the march, they were greeted with a smile and a stiff-arm salute from Izzat Ibrahim, vice chairman of the nation's top ruling body and the second-in-command after Mr. Hussein.

Some of the marchers said they had only been told the night before to appear at the parade today. But preparations for war itself, others said, began stepping up a week ago.

Samira Mahmoud, 45, a member of the women's brigade, who marched with her 21-year-old daughter, said that her unit was meeting more often to prepare for providing first aid to wounded soldiers. She said she had no fear of an American attack, no matter how overpowering it might be.

''Nobody has the right to touch one hair on an Iraqi's head,'' she said. ''We are right. They are wrong. Anyone who is right will win.''

Nuri Dahal, 45, a veteran of both the Persian Gulf war of 1991 and the earlier war with Iran, said that he and his unit had been training every day. He has begun running again, and has dropped about six pounds, a change in fitness and weight that he said all three of his wives had noticed.

''Soon, I will be able to run like a 15-year-old boy,'' he said. He has 15 sons. ''All of them are ready to fight,'' he said.

A student, Ahmed Kasim, 28, conceded that the mood at the march today was not especially angry. Only one man, in the crowd of tens of thousands, stopped one American reporter to chant angry slogans. But, Mr. Kasim, said Iraqis' true feelings ran deeper as war with America seemed close again.

''We are angry inside,'' Mr. Kasim said. ''That means our anger is not on our faces. It will show at the time of the battles.''
