

A NATION AT WAR: NORTHERN FRONT; Scenes of the Other Iraq: Green Fields, Starry Nights, Friendly Locals
By David Rohde
April 1, 2003

Five days after 1,000 paratroopers from the 173rd Airborne Brigade parachuted into northern Iraq, the soldiers are consolidating their positions here and looking southward, toward their fellow American soldiers and toward Baghdad.

Capt. Eric Baus, a 30-year-old father of two from Collingswood, N.J., said his younger brother was a military intelligence officer in Kuwait.

''I told him you start in the south and I'll start in the north,'' said Captain Baus, whose wife is pregnant with their third child.

As American supplies and equipment continue to flow into northern Iraq, American military officials are declining to comment on plans for a northern front in Iraq.

For now, the roughly 2,000 paratroopers and several hundred special operations soldiers on the ground here do not appear to be a large enough force to launch an attack. But their presence is seen as a stabilizing influence that could discourage Turkey from dispatching troops into northern Iraq, and thus hold off armed clashes between Turks and Kurds.

So the paratroopers are spending their days fortifying positions, unloading supplies and adjusting to a climate and terrain that are far different from what they expected.

''I hear Iraq, and I think sand and volleyball nets,'' said Staff Sgt. Rodney O'Dell, 29, a Tennessee-born father of three. ''I come here, and I see cornfields.''

The paratroopers' airstrip, about 25 miles from the front lines, is surrounded by farming hamlets, emerald winter wheat fields and snow-covered peaks. Barley springs from the ground here. To their amazement, the American soldiers are calling northern Iraq ''beautiful country.''

''It's still hard to actually accept it,'' said Specialist Myron Tuttle, 24, from Tulare, Calif. ''We're actually in Iraq.''

Soldiers said the biggest surprise of their parachute jump, during a miserable night of freezing rain, was the sea of mud they landed in. One paratrooper hit the ground like a spear, soldiers said. Hip-deep in mud, he had to be pulled out by other paratroopers.

''It's the muddiest drop zone I've ever landed in,'' said Captain Baus. ''I've never seen mud like this before.''

The saving grace was the local Kurds, soldiers said. Soon after the Americans arrived, villagers brought over freshly baked bread. While American soldiers in the south try to overcome suspicions among the local population, Kurds, who have been brutally oppressed by Saddam Hussein's regime, eagerly welcomed the Americans.

Specialist Nathan Whitelatch, 20, from Connellsville, Pa., said the reception from the Kurds had given meaning to the unit's mission.

His goals in Iraq were simple: ''Stop more people from dying,'' he said. ''Stop more Americans from dying.''

So far, the only thing the soldiers have battled are the elements. Four sunny days have allowed the soldiers to dry out, to a certain extent. But those who parachuted in can still be easily identified by uniforms that are caked in dried mud.

At night, temperatures are dropping well below freezing, and the soldiers have few tents and sleeping bags and are sleeping in the open. Beneath the luminous stars of northern Iraq, they curl up under their poncho liners and shiver.

''The poncho liner helps,'' Specialist Tuttle said. ''But it's pretty thin.''

With each arriving transport plane, that is changing. The single asphalt runway and two tents that existed here before the Americans arrived have been overrun by soldiers, command tents and equipment.

More than a dozen Humvees bristling with soldiers and weapons make daily patrols in the area. Half a dozen huge supply trucks ferry soldiers and equipment. Backhoes and bulldozers build berms to stop potential suicide bombers. Soldiers have strung concertina wire at entrances to stop intruders. For a mile in every direction, squads of paratroopers man machine gun nests on green rolling hills reminiscent of Scotland.

''I didn't expect it be so green,'' said Captain Baus, who joked that the Americans tan desert camouflage uniforms were out of place. ''I kind of feel like it's a black tie affair and we showed up wearing red.'' (The Kurds say the fields will be brown within a month as the summer heat arrives.)

With limited communications equipment, few soldiers have had a chance to contact family members. Sgt. Rodney Pullen has been among the most anxious.

As the soldiers prepared to board planes to fly to Iraq last Wednesday, Sergeant Pullen heard that his wife, Daniella, had gone into labor. The couple was expecting a baby they knew was a girl. For the next five days, he heard nothing. This afternoon, he spoke to his wife by satellite telephone.

''Hey babe, it's me, I'm calling you from Iraq,'' he said breathlessly. ''Are you O.K.? Is she beautiful? What color is her hair?''

His wife replied that his daughter, Sofia, in fact, was beautiful. She was born at 5:30 a.m. on Thursday, a few hours after her father landed in a muddy wheat field in northern Iraq.
