

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITARY PLANS; Allies Will Move In, Even if Saddam Hussein Moves Out
By Michael R. Gordon
March 18, 2003

Even if Saddam Hussein leaves Iraq within 48 hours, as President Bush demanded, allied forces plan to move north into Iraqi territory, American officials said today.

It appeared extremely unlikely that Mr. Hussein and his family would accede to Mr. Bush's ultimatum, given the preparations that the Iraqi leader is making to turn Baghdad into a stronghold and defend it against air and land attack. Even if they did, officials said, allied forces would enter Iraq to search for hidden caches of weapons of mass destruction and help stabilize the nation so that a new and more democratic regime could take over.

''It is too late for Saddam Hussein to remain in power,'' President Bush said today, addressing the Iraqi military.

''It is not too late for the Iraqi military to act with honor and protect your country by permitting the peaceful entry of coalition forces to eliminate weapons of mass destruction.''

The United States forces that have assembled in Kuwait have a special unit that is designed to search for chemical and biological arms. It is a former field artillery unit that has been overhauled for its new mission, equipped with mobile laboratories and assigned specialized teams.

The details of the American plans are a closely guarded secret. But Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said yesterday in Washington that the only way for Iraq to avoid an attack is for Mr. Hussein to leave the country and ''allow this matter to be resolved through the peaceful entry of force.''

Even if Mr. Hussein were to be ousted in a sudden coup, a military intervention seems very likely. The question no longer seems to be whether American and British troops will enter Iraq but under what circumstances.

American and allied troops learned from news reports that Mr. Bush planned to make his ultimatum.

Few were able to watch his live broadcast, which occurred at 4 a.m. local time.

The ultimatum, however, was hardly a surprise since American and British forces have been spending the past few days making final preparations for an invasion. For many soldiers the debate in the United Nations Security Council has held little suspense. It has been a kind of diplomatic background noise for an attack plan that has been gathering steam with each passing day.

Adding to the sense of war's inevitability, the United Nations withdrew its monitors from Kuwait's border with Iraq, with the Kuwaiti military taking their place. The Kuwaitis have also removed part of their border fence so that allied forces can rumble north. American forces have practiced crashing through sand berms that resemble the ones along the Iraq-Kuwait border.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the head of the United States Central Command, left his headquarters in Qatar to visit Camp Doha, where the land war command is based. General Franks strolled around the cavernous command center greeting the military officers who staff it. He appeared relaxed and confident. General Franks said in a brief interview that he wanted to meet the staff to ''see what is in their eyes,'' and clearly seemed to like what he saw.

General Franks also met with Kuwait's deputy prime minister and foreign minister, Sheik Sabah al-Ahmed al-Sabah, as well as Kuwait's defense minister, Sheik Jaber Mubarak al-Sabah.The Kuwaiti visit, in fact, is part of a series of trips that General Franks has been making to key gulf states in the past few days, including Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, to reassure their leaders that the United States can protect them and will prevail in a war with Iraq.

The Kuwaitis are worried that a prolonged conflict would leave it exposed to complaints from Islamic leaders about its decision to allow the Americans and British to use it as a launching pad for an invasion. The Kuwaitis are also concerned that they might come under missile attack from Iraq's suspected cache of Scud missiles or its known arsenal of Ababil-100 surface-to-surface missiles.

Iraq has moved Ababil-100 missiles near Basra and within range of Kuwait City in recent weeks.

American warplanes have bombed the sites but nobody knows for sure if all of the Ababil-100 missiles have been detected, let alone destroyed.

General Franks reportedly sought to reassure the Kuwaitis that the American military would protect Kuwait with strikes against Iraqi missile launchers and Patriot antimissile systems.

If Kuwait should be struck despite those defensive measures, a multinational ''consequence management'' team made up of Germans, Czechs and Americans would be dispatched to identify any chemical or germ agents used and to rescue the victims.

But the focus here is on taking the offensive, not absorbing blows form Iraq's forces.

Asked how he felt about the war plan that he is more likely than ever to execute, General Franks said, ''I feel really good.''
