

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Kurds Plead for Protection Against Gas and Fault U.S.
By David Rohde
March 13, 2003

Dr. Baravan Saidullah sits in his barren clinic each day and tries not to think about the Iraqi soldiers on a hilltop a mile away. If they lob chemical weapons into this town surrounded by a sea of wheat fields, the young doctor's instructions to civilians are simple: run.

''The only preparation is evacuation,'' Dr. Saidullah said. ''If there is war, we don't believe anyone will escape.''

Kurdish officials here say that the United States has failed to respond to repeated requests for gas masks and chemical weapons suits for the people of Kurdish-controlled northern Iraq. Local officials say only a few dozen antiquated gas masks are available in the region, which is home to 3.8 million people.

Leaders of the Kurds, a group whose gassing by Saddam Hussein's forces has been invoked by Washington as one justification for war, say they are defenseless against a chemical attack. An estimated 5,000 Kurds were killed in Iraqi attacks believed to involve nerve gas and blister agents like mustard gas in the late 1980's, according to Kurdish medical researchers. In all, 60,000 Kurds died in a campaign by the Iraqi military to put down a Kurdish insurgency.

In a letter to President Bush on Feb. 13, two Kurdish leaders, Jalal Talabani and Massoud Barzani, expressed alarm over the lack of equipment.

''There is a growing anxiety at the inability to deliver on pledges of help to our region,'' they wrote in the letter, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times. ''We have yet to receive any of the protective equipment promised by your officials to deal with the very real risk of chemical or biological weapons attack.''

A senior American official said in a telephone interview that the Pentagon was addressing the problem. He said Turkey's recent blocking of the deployment of American troops had complicated the situation.

''There was one set of circumstances when American forces were coming in a big way through Turkey,'' said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''If they don't come through Turkey then the issue is different. We are very much focused on that issue.''

Officials in Washington have cited other possible obstacles to providing equipment to the Kurds, including restrictions in United Nations resolutions and United States law on sending supplies to Iraq.

Bardarash illustrates how vulnerable the Kurds are to attack. The bustling community of 11,000 people sits on a broad plain. Nearby, on rolling green hilltops, Iraqi soldiers occupy bunkers that can be seen over roofs.

There is little sense of panic here. On a recent afternoon, two dozen Kurdish youths played soccer in bright white and royal blue jerseys as Iraqi soldiers sat on the hilltops. Through binoculars, the Iraqi soldiers could be seen lounging on the grass without their rifles, or sitting and chatting with one another.

''We know the U.S. will protect us,'' said Idris Yisin, the amiable, middle-aged coach of one of the soccer teams. ''But if they don't, what can we do?''

Even if American cruise missiles and airstrikes destroy Iraqi missiles and rockets in an initial attack, Iraqi soldiers could fire artillery or mortar rounds with chemical warheads into the town. The nearby Kurdish-controlled cities of Erbil and Dohuk are only 10 to 15 miles from Iraqi forces and lie within rocket and artillery range. The two cities have a combined population of well over one million.

In interviews, most Kurds expressed an odd combination of calm and fatalism. They said they trusted the United States to protect them and expected Iraqi soldiers to simply surrender should there be war. But victims of past chemical attacks expressed alarm. They asked how, 14 years after they were gassed, the United States and other countries could have failed to provide them with protective gear.

''I'm worried to an extent that I can't go on studying,'' said Dhahir Mahmood Ahmed, 23, a college student who survived a 1988 Iraqi gas attack on the city of Halabja that killed at least 4,000 people, including his uncle and 12 cousins. Asked what he would do in the event of an attack now, he said, ''I will wait for death.''

Dr. Saidullah, a wiry 30-year-old general practitioner, said he had no protective suits and no antidotes to treat victims. The only chemical weapons training he had received, he said, was a one-day course taught by Kurdish doctors who received their information from the Internet and books. In an attack, he said, civilians are to cover their mouths with a wet cloth that includes a piece of charcoal if possible and flee to higher ground.

He asked why Kuwaiti and Israeli civilians were well equipped while the Kurds had nothing.

''You in the U.S. are responsible for what happens here,'' he said. ''Pray for us.''
