

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | WEAPONS; U.S. Hunts for Bio-Agents And Gas at an Iraq Depot
By Judith Miller
March 27, 2003

American military officials have found no traces of chemical or biological agents at a sprawling Iraqi ammunition storage facility south of Baghdad, weapons experts and military officers said today.

But officials said the site at Najaf, about 90 miles south of the Iraqi capital, remained suspicious because there were several indications that chemical or germ weapons might have been made or stored there.

Of greatest interest to intelligence officials is information being provided by an Iraqi general who was a senior official there and who surrendered to American forces when they entered the complex about four days ago. Officials said the general, who claims not to have had any involvement in Iraq's chemical warfare program, told military intelligence analysts that there were special bunkers and underground tunnels in the compound that neither he nor other senior staff were permitted to enter.

In addition, a site survey team found a biological hazard sign on a wooden pallet with a crate in bunker No. 36, and markings on other crates in bunker No. 37 indicating ''CN-1,'' which is sometimes used to identify riot control agents. They also found wax on the surface of an artillery shell, a substance used at times in shells containing chemical agents. The soldiers and experts also found 40 Soviet-style gas masks with extra filters.

Hydraulic triple-locked doors barred the entrance to some of the more than 100 bunkers in the three-square-mile complex, much of which is protected by an electrical fence and trenches.

Weapons experts said they had reached no conclusions about whether chemical or germ warfare agents or weapons were stored at the facility. ''Methodically exploring a site of this size and complexity shows how painstaking and slow a meticulous survey can be,'' said an officer with the 75th Exploitation Task Force, a group of weapons specialists, intelligence officers, Special Forces and other experts commanded and supported by part of an Army artillery brigade based in Fort Sill, Okla.

The team's work was further delayed when American intelligence officers transferred the Iraqi general, two colonels and two majors to an undisclosed location for questioning. That decision meant that the team of experts sent to follow up on initial reports of suspected chemical or biological weapons were unable to question the Iraqi officers in person, or to have the general show the team where the off-limits parts of the facility were located.

''We have never conducted a systematic hunt for weapons of mass destruction in a combat situation on such a large scale,'' said one weapons expert who has studied the reports filed by the site survey team working at Najaf. ''We're still feeling our way.''

The site was on a list of suspected facilities compiled by weapons experts and other government officials who are hunting for weapons of mass destruction. But it was not initially visited by either the small teams of Pentagon experts who are charged with surveying suspected sites, or by those responsible for studying such facilities in greater detail.

Instead, it was entered by forces of the Army's Third Infantry Division as they pushed north toward Baghdad. Reports from the field said that some 300 Iraqis were taken prisoner at the site, and that about 30 Iraqi troops, including the general and four other senior officers, surrendered to the Americans.

The Jerusalem Post, which has a reporter with the Army forces that initially entered the site, reported at the time that an American soldier was slightly wounded by an explosive that detonated as he was trying to clear part of the facility.

On Sunday, Lt. Gen. John Abizaid of the Army confirmed that an Iraqi general and two other officers were being held and were providing information. But he added that it was too early to say whether American forces had found chemical or biological agent at the site. ''Suffice it to say,'' he added, ''that so far we haven't found any conclusive evidence.''

The small teams of weapons hunters consist mainly of representatives from several different government agencies, and include explosives experts, intelligence analysts, Special Forces operatives, scientists, laboratory technicians and former nuclear and other unconventional weapons inspectors.

British planners and experts are also working with the American teams and officers of the 75th XTF, as the task force is known. For this mission, they are employing a wide range of sophisticated new technology, some of which is being tested in the field on a large scale for the first time. They agreed to discuss this and other weapons sites only if they were not identified by name.

Their equipment includes highly sensitive detectors and two transportable laboratories that can test for the presence of chemical and biological agents, identify their composition or strain and conduct DNA fingerprinting.
