

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 30, 2003; Resuming Ground Drive, Bombing Baghdad, and Courting Civilians
By Robert D. McFadden
March 31, 2003

American forces south of Baghdad made their first probing attacks against a Republican Guard division at Karbala. It was not the opening of the battle for Baghdad, but the attacks were intended to shape that fight, keep the pressure on the enemy and re-establish allied momentum after days of stalled progress.

Allied warplanes kept up relentless attacks on Baghdad and on Republican Guard units entrenched on the city's periphery. But no ground attack on the city itself appeared imminent. American invasion forces were less than 50 miles from Baghdad, and were continuing to strengthen their supply lines while air and artillery strikes ground down the city's defenses.

INTERPRETATIONS -- Was this an operational pause? Had planners underestimated Iraqi resistance? Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Gen. Tommy R. Franks, commander of the American forces in Iraq, insisted that there were no pauses and that the war was going as planned. They acknowledged that the hardest fighting lay ahead, but said time was on the side of the allies.

Mr. Rumsfeld also said that weapons of mass destruction had not been found in Iraq, but contended that was because troops had not yet reached Baghdad and Tikrit where they are believed stockpiled.

AIR ATTACKS -- Allied missiles struck a presidential compound on the Tigris River in central Baghdad, and explosions rocked the city's southern outskirts. Other targets in Baghdad included a training camp for fedayeen guerrilla units, an intelligence complex and surface-to-air missile sites. Bombs also fell in the government-controlled northern towns of Mosul, Kalak and Kirkuk.

After 11 days of war, American officials are unsure if President Saddam Hussein is still alive and cannot say definitively who is in overall command of Iraqi forces. Some American officials say he was in a command bunker hit by missiles on the war's first night.

ALLIED CASUALTIES -- Three Americans were killed and a fourth was wounded when a Marine helicopter crashed in southern Iraq. It was not downed by hostile fire, a military spokesman said, but he gave no details. A British soldier was killed near Basra, where British and Iraqi forces fought artillery duels.

In northern Kuwait, a pickup truck plowed into American soldiers outside a PX at Camp Udairi. Thirteen soldiers were injured, and the driver, a local contract worker, was shot and critically wounded by American troops.

It was unclear if the episode was a suicide attack, but witnesses said there was no doubt the driver struck deliberately; he had turned for a second run when he was shot.

SECURITY -- A day after four American soldiers were killed by a suicide bomber in a taxi near Najaf, all roads were closed around the town 100 miles south of Baghdad, and tight new security measures were imposed to protect allied troops. Iraqi officials, hailing the suicide tactic, said that 4,000 ''martyrs'' from across the Arab world were in Baghdad, ready to die to defend Iraq. The militant Palestinian group Islamic Jihad said it had sent some of them.

THE VIEW FROM ORBIT -- ''It's the ultimate high ground,'' one commander said of the scores of orbiting satellites that are providing coalition forces in Iraq with communications, reconnaissance, target information, weapons guidance, damage assessments, weather forecasts and other tactical advantages. Skeptics say that space technology can lead to overconfidence, that gadgetry cannot subdue dust storms or fight door-to-door.

REACHING OUT -- Tentatively, a few Iraqis walked out of the desert at a place called Diwaniya. They approached the Americans and asked for water. Was it a trick? Guns were lowered. There was talk. Later, the Americans restarted the Iraqis' broken water pump. It was a small encounter, but to the American fighting forces, it suggested hope.

Somewhere in central Iraq, a man called Khalid, clutching a baby, walked up to a marine patrol. No guns, he said. He wanted help for his town. Capt. Aaron Robertson said, ''I have kids just like you.'' Food, water and electric power were provided, and two local men told the Americans where to find the local Baath Party leaders and their guns. Later, the marines seized an arms cache, party records and 27 prisoners.

Near Nasiriya, marines brought food, water and medicine to a tiny camp of refugees who had fled the bombing. Medics treated a few Iraqis, mostly giving them pills for diarrhea. Children crowded around a marine with a bag of candy; the sand was soon littered with bright little wrappers.

In the southern Iraqi desert, a marine helicopter search team rescued two American soldiers who had been lost for seven days after being separated from their unit in a blinding sandstorm. They were hungry, thirsty, tired and glad to be alive. ROBERT D. McFADDEN
