

A NATION AT WAR: THE PENTAGON; Rumsfeld Says Iraq Is Collapsing, Lists 8 Objectives of War
By Thom Shanker and Eric Schmitt
March 22, 2003

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld declared today that the Iraqi government was starting to crumble as he laid out eight broad objectives by which the Bush administration would define victory.

Saddam Hussein and his loyalists are ''starting to lose control of their country,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''The confusion of Iraqi officials is growing. Their ability to see what is happening on the battlefield, to communicate with their forces and to control their country is slipping away.''

Mr. Rumsfeld listed eight sweeping goals that the Bush administration sought to achieve in the war.

Senior White House aides said President Bush would monitor developments in the war from Camp David, the presidential retreat, where he was to be joined by senior members of his war council.

Although Mr. Rumsfeld did not mention the first Persian Gulf war in 1991, to drive Iraqi forces from Kuwait, he was no doubt cognizant that the first President Bush was criticized for achieving battlefield success but not a decisive political victory over Mr. Hussein.

''Our goal is to defend the American people, and to eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, and to liberate the Iraqi people,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said during a Pentagon news briefing and defining the overall goal of the war.

The first of the eight specific aims, Mr. Rumsfeld said, is to ''end the regime of Saddam Hussein by striking with force on a scope and scale that makes clear to Iraqis that he and his regime are finished.''

Second, Iraq's arsenal of biological and chemical weapons, and any program to develop nuclear weapons, are also targets, as the American military has been ordered ''to identify, isolate and eventually eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems, production capabilities, and distribution networks,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Troops will then ''search for, capture, drive out terrorists who have found safe harbor in Iraq,'' he added.

Next, he said, the allied forces will ''collect such intelligence as we can find related to terrorist networks in Iraq and beyond.''

The fifth goal, Mr. Rumsfeld said, is to ''collect such intelligence as we can find related to the global network of illicit weapons of mass destruction activity.''

The United States also seeks ''to end sanctions and to immediately deliver humanitarian relief, food and medicine to the displaced and to the many needy Iraqi citizens,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Military forces also will ''secure Iraq's oil fields and resources, which belong to the Iraqi people, and which they will need to develop their country after decades of neglect by the Iraqi regime,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Lastly, Mr. Rumsfeld said, the war effort is ''to help the Iraqi people create the conditions for a rapid transition to a representative self-government that is not a threat to its neighbors and is committed to ensuring the territorial integrity of that country.''

This morning, Mr. Bush gave a classified briefing on the military campaign to five Congressional leaders he had summoned to the Oval Office.

''We're making progress,'' Mr. Bush told reporters at the start of the meeting. ''We will stay on task until we've achieved our objective, which is to rid Iraq of weapons of mass destruction.''

The leaders at the meeting were the House speaker, J. Dennis Hastert, Republican of Illinois; Bill Frist of Tennessee, the Senate majority leader; Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Senate minority leader; Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader; and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader.

Mr. Bush thanked the leaders for resolutions passed by both houses of Congress supporting American troops and commending the president as commander in chief. ''Not only do we support those brave souls who are sacrificing on our behalf, but we want to thank their parents and their families for their dedication as well,'' Mr. Bush said.

Earlier, Mr. Bush met with Mr. Rumsfeld about the unfolding military campaign and attended a National Security Council meeting in the White House Situation Room. After taping his weekly radio address, to be broadcast Saturday morning, Mr. Bush took off early this afternoon from the White House South Lawn in a helicopter bound for Camp David.

Mr. Bush also won formal support from the House of Representatives today when, after hours of wrangling, the House voted 392 to 11 to adopt a resolution supporting the president's ''firm leadership and decisive action in the conduct of military operations in Iraq.''

All the no votes came from Democrats, while another 21 Democrats and one Republican voted ''present.''

The Senate adopted its resolution unanimously on Thursday afternoon.

As more Iraqi troops began to surrender today, some senior American military officers expressed wariness that secret talks with elite Iraqi units like the Republican Guard and Special Republican Guard would lead to significant surrenders.

''I'd be cautious,'' said one senior officer. ''I wouldn't raise expectations.''
