

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRESIDENT; With Iraq War Hovering, Bush Pays Tribute to Veterans
By David E. Sanger and Elisabeth Bumiller
Nov. 12, 2002

In a dark downpour, President Bush made an early, unscheduled visit this morning to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, then used later Veterans Day events to try to assure the Arab world that the United States had no ambitions to establish an imperial presence in a post-Saddam Hussein Iraq.

''We have no territorial ambitions, we don't seek an empire,'' Mr. Bush said in remarks in the White House East Room after visiting the memorial. ''Our nation is committed to freedom for ourselves and for others.'' Then, in a clear reference to Germany and Japan after World War II, the president added that ''we and our allies have fought evil regimes and left in their place self-governing and prosperous nations.''

Mr. Bush's comments came as the White House was accelerating a public relations strategy to cast the United States not as a conqueror, but as a liberating force that would rid the Iraqi people of a dictator. His remarks were amplified by Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, who said in a National Public Radio interview today that Mr. Hussein's hopes of pitting Arab states against the West would fail.

''No one, the Arab League, nobody else, can save him if he tries now to do what he's done for all these years: deceive and hunt and peck and hide,'' Ms. Rice said.

Mr. Bush began his public day at the memorial about 7:45 a.m., after his motorcade made a quiet trip from the White House with stops for red lights and without sirens.

White House officials said Mr. Bush, whose service in the Texas Air National Guard during the Vietnam War meant that he was not sent to fight in Southeast Asia, had never before visited the monument as president. But this Veterans Day is also the memorial's 20th anniversary, and officials said Mr. Bush had decided that a visit was a fitting tribute. When he arrived at the memorial, he walked alone along the black-granite slab, shielding himself with a black umbrella and gingerly stepping over puddles. At the vertex of the monument, Mr. Bush saluted a military aide, who handed him a small American flag, which the president quickly planted along the wall.

The president then stood silently at the base of the wall scanning the names of some of the 58,000 killed or missing. After a few moments, he started shaking the hands of a few tourists and veterans stunned to come suddenly upon the president of the United States.

''Thank you for your service,'' Mr. Bush said to each veteran.

Later, in his East Room remarks, Mr. Bush cited an unnamed veteran who recalled the closing days of World War II, when the sight of ''a squad of G.I.'s'' brought ''the biggest smiles you ever saw to people's lips, and joy to their hearts.'' He added, ''G.I.'s meant candy and cigarettes, C-rations and freedom.'' Mr. Bush quoted the veteran as saying that America ''has sent the best of her young men around the world, not to conquer, but to liberate; not to terrorize, but to help.''

White House officials said after the president's remarks that the veteran he cited came from the historian Stephen E. Ambrose's book ''The Victors: Eisenhower and His Boys: The Men of World War II.'' Mr. Ambrose wrote that while he would never forget the words of the veteran, he had long since forgotten his name.

Administration officials say they worry that such speeches can create expectations that Americans will be welcomed into Baghdad, a situation that one senior official said last week ''may turn out to be true, but may not.''

Later in the morning, in a speech at Arlington National Cemetery, Mr. Bush linked Veterans Days of the past with his administration's campaign against terrorism.

''When war is forced upon us, we will see it through to victory,'' Mr. Bush said. ''At this hour, members of our military are serving on the scattered battlefields of a new kind of war. In Afghanistan and beyond, they're on the trail of killers who brought death to the innocent and war to our country.'' The war will go on, Mr. Bush said, ''until the terrorists who struck America are fully and finally defeated.''

Mr. Bush also used the occasion to levy more threats of war against Mr. Hussein.

''We will not permit a dictator who has used weapons of mass destruction to threaten America with chemical, biological or nuclear weapons,'' Mr. Bush said. ''This great nation -- this great nation -- will not live at the mercy of any foreign plot or power. The dictator of Iraq will fully disarm, or the United States will lead a coalition and disarm him.''

But American troops, Mr. Bush said, ''do not come as conquerors, but as liberators.''
