

Bush Sees Korean Nuclear Effort as Different From Iraq's
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Oct. 22, 2002

President Bush said today that the North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, had to disarm his nation ''for the sake of peace,'' but indicated that he saw a significant difference between North Korea's development of nuclear weapons and Iraq's pursuit of them.

In his first public remarks about North Korea since the White House announced last week that the country was conducting a covert nuclear weapons program, Mr. Bush said he would use diplomatic pressure, not threats of military action, to try to persuade North Korea to dismantle its nuclear efforts.

''It is a troubling discovery, and it's a discovery that we intend to work with our friends to deal with,'' he told reporters in the Oval Office after a meeting with the NATO secretary general, Lord Robertson. ''I believe we can do it peacefully. I look forward to working with people to encourage them that we must convince Kim Jong Il to disarm for the sake of peace.''

In contrast, Mr. Bush said he was threatening military action against President Saddam Hussein of Iraq because his case was ''unique'' in that he had gassed his own people and ''thumbed his nose'' at United Nations resolutions for more than a decade.

The president's remarks reflected recent comments by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, that Iraq poses a greater threat to the United States, even if it does not yet have nuclear weapons, because of its record of using chemical weapons and its hatred of the United States and its allies.

Nonetheless, Mr. Bush said that he viewed North Korea's admission ''very seriously'' and that he would work with the leaders of China, Japan, South Korea and Russia at an economic summit meeting of Pacific nations this weekend in Los Cabos, Mexico, to exert pressure on Mr. Kim.

The No. 2 official in North Korea made a public overture to the United States today, saying he was willing to negotiate over the country's nuclear weapons program ''if the United States is willing to withdraw its hostile policy toward the North.'' American officials said they were uncertain how to respond to the overture by Kim Yong Nam, the country's nominal head of state. Mr. Kim made the offer during a meeting in Pyongyang, the North's capital, with a South Korean delegation.

For now, the administration remains embroiled in an internal debate over how and even if the United States should negotiate with North Korea. Hard-liners in the administration argue that the North should be required to dismantle its nuclear program before any talks can begin, but some State Department officials say negotiations will be necessary before the North can be induced to move. The administration is at the same time under growing pressure from Asian allies, which are urging that talks should begin.

A 1994 arms control accord between the United States, its allies and North Korea that might have served as a framework for talks is for all practical purposes dead, and has been ever since the North Koreans admitted to the United States early this month that they were conducting a secret nuclear program. At the same time, North Korea said it had ''nullified'' the 1994 accord, which provided Western energy aid in exchange for the North's promise to freeze the development of nuclear weapons. Today, senior administration officials said that because the North Koreans had walked away from the accord, the United States had no intention of honoring it.

Similarly, the European Union, which is helping finance the construction of two nuclear reactors in North Korea to generate electricity, promised under the accord, said today that it would almost certainly terminate support of the program.

''It is difficult in present circumstances to see how we can continue with our contributions unless the North Koreans make clear pretty rapidly that they are going to stop their attempts to develop nuclear weapons,'' Christopher Patten, the European Union's commissioner for external relations, said after a meeting with European foreign ministers.

In Moscow today, John R. Bolton, the under secretary of state for arms control, turned over a dossier of American intelligence on the North's clandestine project. Some American officials have suggested that Russian companies have been among the North's suppliers, though they indicated that the Russians provided less crucial technology than did Pakistan.

After the meeting, the deputy Russian foreign minister, Georgi Mamedov, appeared to put the blame for the showdown with North Korea, at least in part, on the administration's new doctrine of military pre-emption and its inclusion of North Korea as part of an ''axis of evil.''

''We think that such statements may aggravate the situation and don't facilitate constructive solution of the nonproliferation issues,'' Mr. Mamedov said.
