

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE RISK TO ISRAEL; Sharon Plans Talks in U.S. on Keeping Iraq at Bay
By Steven R. Weisman
Oct. 15, 2002

President Bush and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel plan to discuss strategies to neutralize the threat of an Iraqi missile attack on Israel in order to avoid the need for Israel to retaliate against Iraq itself in the event of a war, administration officials said today.

An official said that a series of meetings, beginning Tuesday with Mr. Sharon's arrival in Washington, would focus on plans for the United States to locate and destroy Iraqi missile sites in the initial phase of a war.

The goal, the official added, would be to spare Israel from having to endure missile attacks from Iraq, followed by American pressure not to strike back. Such pressure was successfully exerted and widely resented in Israel during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The issue of what Israel would do in the event of a war has been sharpened recently by conflicting comments from Bush administration and Israeli officials about what should happen if Iraq attacks Israel.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, repeating the American position of a decade ago, has said that it would be in Israel's ''overwhelming best interests'' not to intervene if the United States went to war with Iraq.

The fear in Washington is that an Israeli response would inflame the Arab world, causing uprisings in Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and other countries the United States is hoping would support a war on Iraq.

But Israeli military officials say it was a mistake for Israel to do nothing in 1991, when it was hit by 39 Iraq Scud missiles. They say Israel's restraint was interpreted as weakness by its enemies.

Addressing the issue recently in Jerusalem, Mr. Sharon asserted that in 1991, the administration of President Bush's father ''did not take enough steps to protect Israel or to prevent attacks on Israel.'' He also suggested that Israel would exercise some restraint, but only up to a point.

''I hope that the U.S.'s mode of operation with its coalition partners will be such that a potential attack against Israel will be averted,'' Mr. Sharon told the Jerusalem Post last month. He said that if there were attacks and they did not hit Israeli population centers or cause casualties, Israel would ''not make it hard'' on the United States by retaliating.

''If, on the other hand, Israel is harmed, if we suffer casualties or if nonconventional weapons of mass destruction are used against us, then definitely Israel will take the proper actions to defend its citizens,'' Mr. Sharon said.

An Israeli official said the task of striking Iraqi missile batteries might be easier in a new war than it was in 1991 because the Iraq military had fewer missiles and the means of attacking them by unmanned planes or other aircraft had become more advanced.

Another topic to be discussed when the Israeli leader meets with Mr. Bush and others in Washington is the administration's request that Israel exercise restraint in another sphere -- its crackdown on Palestinians, which has led to a surge in civilian casualties.

A wave of killings of Palestinian civilians led Mr. Bush to send a letter to Mr. Sharon last week. The letter was disclosed in the Israeli press and then confirmed here today as coming from Mr. Bush himself.

The United States is increasingly concerned that Israeli actions against Palestinians, which Israel has defended as needed to quell a spate of suicide bombings and attempted bombings, would also antagonize the Arab world at a delicate stage in the planning for a possible war against Iraq.

Mr. Sharon's visit was scheduled 10 days ago, when the administration expressed concern about Israel's 10-day siege of the headquarters of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, in Ramallah, in the West Bank. American concern has only deepened in the last week as Israelis have stepped up their attacks in the Gaza strip.

The Bush administration objected to the Israeli attacks on several grounds and an administration official said the increased antagonism of Arabs was only one cause for concern.

Another focus is a contention by the Bush administration that there had been some success in marginalizing Mr. Arafat, and encouraging Palestinians to look elsewhere for leadership, but that this trend had been undercut by Mr. Sharon's authorization of the Ramallah attack.

Further, the administration maintains that the Palestinian Authority under Mr. Arafat had begun to renew its crackdown on militant rival groups and that this effort, too, was undercut by the Israeli actions.

Israeli officials defend the attacks as necessary to hold the Palestinian leadership accountable for suicide bombings and other attacks. Mr. Sharon has said Mr. Arafat and other Palestinian leaders have deliberately increased attacks on Israelis because they believe that the United States will pressure Israel not to retaliate.
