

Lautenberg Shifts Stance And Backs Iraq Resolution
By Andrew Jacobs and Richard Lezin Jones
Oct. 12, 2002

Frank R. Lautenberg, the Democratic nominee for Senate, said today that he unequivocally stands behind the Senate resolution giving President Bush the authority to act against Iraq, as he and the Republican candidate, Douglas R. Forrester, spent the day focusing on the potential war.

This week Mr. Lautenberg, an 18-year veteran of the Senate who retired in 2000, demurred on the issue, saying he wanted to wait until he was elected before weighing in.

Today Mr. Forrester seized on his opponent's shift, saying it was a last-minute attempt by Mr. Lautenberg to ingratiate himself with voters. ''This is a very critical time,'' Mr. Forrester said. ''We need a strong defense; we need strong intelligence gathering; we need a strong F.B.I.; we need to bring terrorists to justice. And Mr. Lautenberg is on the wrong side of all those issues.''

Mr. Lautenberg called a news conference at the George Washington Bridge to address the criticism.

Standing in the shadow of the bridge, he was flanked by three men who lost family members to acts of terrorism -- the crash of Pan Am Flight 103 at Lockerbie, Scotland, and a suicide bombing in Israel.

He passed out a summary of his accomplishments, listing his role in the creation of a law that bans foreign aid to nations that sponsor terrorism and another that allows the families of victims to collect damages from terrorist states.

Mr. Lautenberg, 78, an Army veteran who served in World War II, also used the occasion to suggest that his challenger had avoided military service during the Vietnam War.

He said he was infuriated by Mr. Forrester's criticism of his record, ''especially when you consider he avoided serving when our country was in a major war.'' Tom Rubino, a spokesman for the Forrester campaign, called the insinuation of draft dodging ''an outright lie.'' He added that Mr. Forrester, 49, had registered for the draft but was never called to serve.

Mr. Rubino criticized Mr. Lautenberg for suggesting otherwise. ''It's a shame that he can't defend his own voting record without false personal attacks on Mr. Forrester,'' he said. ''This is the type of mean-spirited campaign that Lautenberg runs.''

Though it is only a week old, the battle between Mr. Forrester and Mr. Lautenberg has become increasingly combative and personal. Until Sept. 30, Mr. Forrester was running against Senator Robert G. Torricelli, who dropped out of the race after polls showed him badly trailing his opponent. Two days later, Democratic leaders recruited Mr. Lautenberg to come out of retirement and fill the ballot. Despite protests from Republicans, the State Supreme Court upheld the move, and the United States Supreme Court let it stand.

Mr. Forrester has nevertheless continued to ridicule the maneuver, referring to his new opponent as the ''Torricelli-Lautenberg machine.''

In an increasingly Democratic state, Mr. Lautenberg has sought to depict Mr. Forrester as a conservative who opposes abortion and champions gun rights.

In recent days, Mr. Forrester has picked through the former senator's 18-year record for instances when, he asserts, Mr. Lautenberg was weak on military matters and defense spending.

He said Mr. Lautenberg voted to cut the F.B.I. budget, opposed pay raises for military personnel and repeatedly voted against the death penalty for terrorists who murder Americans. ''Mr. Lautenberg just does not have good judgment when it comes to the kinds of things that keep our families safe,'' he said during a campaign appearance at a hotel at Newark Liberty International Airport, where he had gone to address Hispanic business leaders.

Mr. Lautenberg countered by mentioning his work on the Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, the Military Construction Appropriations Subcommittee and votes he made as a senator in which he said he helped increase the salaries of armed services personnel. Although a longtime foe of the death penalty, he said he voted for a 1995 resolution asking the attorney general to mete out the most severe punishment, including the death penalty, to those responsible for the Oklahoma City bombing.

Asked about his change of heart on yesterday's Senate resolution on Iraq, Mr. Lautenberg said ''the evidence out there'' had persuaded him, although he said he still had questions about how the president's goals might be accomplished. ''I'd like to know what the tactics might be,'' he said. ''But in terms of the action, I fully support it.''

David Rebovich, who teaches political science at Rider University, said it was unlikely that Mr. Forrester's attempts to paint his opponent as a dove would resonate with voters.

''For now, this is mostly insider stuff,'' he said. ''On the other hand, if the bombs start dropping on Iraq, and Forrester can immediately wrap the flag around himself and rally around Bush, he could pick up votes.''
