

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 21, 2003

A NATION AT WAR: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 21, 2003; Bombarding Baghdad, Deaths in Battle, and Rising Support for Bush
By Anthony Depalma
March 22, 2003

The air campaign in Iraq began in earnest, with coalition fighter jets attacking several hundred targets in and around Baghdad. The night sky above Iraq's capital was pierced by brilliant blasts and towering columns of smoke. The day-old ground offensive gathered strength and speed, racing to within 200 miles of Baghdad.

AIR POWER -- The much anticipated mass bombardment of Iraq began about 9 p.m. local time. Military officials said hundreds of government buildings and military targets in Baghdad were hit by a powerful combination of missiles and bombs. Other targets in the north and west were also hit. In all, 1,300 missiles and bombs were dropped on Iraq, most of them in Baghdad. Eyewitnesses said no residences in Iraq's capital appeared to have been hit, but there have been no official assessments yet on whether civilians were caught in the fierce bombardment.

TROOPS ADVANCE -- As bombs fell on Baghdad, coalition ground forces advanced quickly through the weakly defended southern desert of Iraq. Army airborne units and Marines moved with orders to attack Iraqi command posts around Nasiriya, softening the way for more troops to move north up the Tigris and Euphrates rivers toward Baghdad.

CASUALTIES AND SURRENDERS -- Two American marines were killed in battle, and officials confirmed that the crash of a Marine helicopter late Thursday had killed four other marines, along with eight British Royal Marines. Initial reports had indicated there were 16 marines on board.

Demoralized and underequipped, many Iraqi troops have been expected to give up without a fight, and today, the commanders and soldiers of Iraq's 51st Division, about 8,000 troops, surrendered to coalition troops bearing down on the southern city of Basra.

IN WASHINGTON -- Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said Saddam Hussein and officials who remained loyal to him were starting to lose control of their country. He said the ''scope and scale'' of the unfolding air campaign would convince Iraqis that Mr. Hussein would not survive.

President Bush expressed satisfaction with the progress of the military campaign. Before briefing congressional leaders he told reporters, ''We will stay on task until we've achieved our objective, which is to rid Iraq of weapons of mass destruction.'' The president planned to spend the weekend at Camp David.

HUSSEIN'S FATE -- Whether or not the pinpoint attack Wednesday on Mr. Hussein's bunker killed the Iraqi leader -- and American military leaders said they just did not know -- the bombing has totally disrupted communications between Baghdad and military units throughout Iraq. Analysts have concluded that Mr. Hussein's voice is heard on the videotape that was broadcast on Iraqi television a short while after the attack. But officials still do not know whether it was recorded earlier. Nor do they know what happened to Mr. Hussein, who has not been seen in 48 hours.

THE NORTHERN FRONT -- More than 1,000 Turkish soldiers crossed the border into northern Iraq, ignoring warnings from Washington. Turkish leaders are worried the Kurds will attempt to create their own homeland. The government finally acted to allow American war planes to fly through Turkish air space on the way to Iraq. Kurdish officials reported that American planes struck the northern cities of Kirkuk and Mosul, destroying several buildings and setting off raging fires. The Kurdish officials said bombs fell on an Iraqi airport, a Republican Guard base, and an Iraqi Army headquarters not far from the city of Jalawa. There was also an unconfirmed report that 61 members of the Kurdish underground had been executed by Iraq's Republican Guard.

PROTESTERS KILLED -- Antiwar demonstrators clogged streets in cities all over the world again, inciting violent clashes with the police. The deadliest incident took place in Yemen, where about 4,000 protesters marched up to the barricades in front of the American Embassy. Officials said a gun battle with the police killed two protesters and left three officers in critical condition.

PARTISAN SUPPORT -- Now that war is under way, support for President Bush and his policies is way up. There is no surprise in that; Americans typically rally around the White House when bombs start falling. But a New York Times/CBS News Poll revealed a huge partisan gap. While 93 percent of Republicans support Mr. Bush's war on Iraq, just 50 percent of Democrats lined up behind the president. Overall, the poll found that 70 percent of Americans approve of Mr. Bush's handling of the war, a jump of 19 percentage points in just 10 days.

WAR RALLY -- As the air war took off, stocks soared. Combined with strong advances over the last few days, the vigorous advances today pushed the Dow Jones Industrial Average to its best weekly performance since 1982. ANTHONY DEPALMA
