

White House Letter; Key to Domestic Agenda Could Be Victory in Iraq
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Feb. 24, 2003

For months now at the White House, it has been all Iraq, all the time. On Saturday at his ranch here, President Bush met with the prime minister of Spain to talk about Iraq. On Tuesday in the Oval Office, he will meet with the prime minister of Bulgaria to talk about Iraq. This past Thursday in Georgia, he gave a speech about the American economy -- and talked about Iraq.

Administration officials readily acknowledge that Iraq has drowned out most of the discussion of Mr. Bush's domestic agenda. ''There's not a lot of oxygen in the air,'' said Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director.

But what administration officials and Republicans close to the White House also concede is that the president's ability to sell the public and Congress on one of the most ambitious domestic agendas in decades is linked to the outcome of the potential war in Iraq, with victory a turnkey to legislative success. A victory, they say, would give momentum to the president's plans to cut taxes and overhaul Medicare, which right now face objections even from some members of Mr. Bush's own party.

''If Saddam decided to leave the country tomorrow,'' a senior White House official said last week, ''a lot of that uncertainty would be removed, and I think you would see salutary effects in a number of areas, including on the legislative and political fronts.''

Officially, there is no linkage. Administration officials say publicly that they would be foolish to count on the political capital from a war that could, after all, go wrong. ''Medicare needs to be modernized, and people deserve jobs regardless of what happens in Iraq,'' said Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary. ''We don't tie the two together.''

But if the war is protracted, with rising costs and increasing casualties, say some Republicans and centrist Democrats the White House is relying on, Mr. Bush's proposals will languish.

''If we get tied up in Iraq, it's going to make it more difficult to get a domestic agenda that costs a lot of money,'' said Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, who is regularly consulted by the White House. ''If it goes well, obviously things can change dramatically.''

It is hard not to ignore the obvious, which is that the domestic agenda and a possible war are moving forward in parallel time. The White House strategy is to push the centerpiece of the agenda, Mr. Bush's $670 billion package of tax cuts, into the legislative process now, so that the proposal will be up for debate on Capitol Hill this spring and summer -- when it is possible that the president will have emerged victorious on Iraq. That is a lesson learned, Republicans say, from Mr. Bush's father, who after the American victory in the 1991 Persian Gulf war had only a minor legislative agenda to offer Capitol Hill.

''He could have had anything he wanted from a Democratic Congress, but they never had a domestic Desert Storm to follow up,'' said David R. Gergen, a White House adviser in the Nixon, Ford, Reagan and Clinton administrations. ''This group has been smart enough to know that if they have an array of proposals already fleshed out in the pipeline, with debate under way, with committees considering them, the president marching in with an 85 percent approval rating can push through far more than the normal political process will allow.''

Other Republicans agree, up to a point.

''It's quite natural that if he would have a big international victory, it would help him,'' said Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is the most influential senator on tax legislation. ''But he shouldn't count on it.''

As Mr. Bush headed back to the wintry landscape of Washington yesterday after a long weekend at his ranch, where he drove Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain through the greening fields in the presidential pick-up truck, he faced a meeting with the nation's governors on Monday, a session with his economic advisers on Tuesday and a speech to a Latino coalition on Wednesday.

But the reality underneath the domestic bustle is that Mr. Bush's week will be dominated by his battle for votes in the United Nations Security Council on a new resolution authorizing military force against Saddam Hussein.

The march toward Baghdad that started back in August is in a period of ''final deliberations,'' Mr. Bush declared this weekend, signaling that Mr. Hussein may have only weeks before an American attack.

Meanwhile, Democrats and Republicans say that for all practical purposes, Medicare, prescription drugs and Mr. Bush's proposal to eliminate the dividend tax, to name just his top domestic priorities, are waiting for Iraq.
