

AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 23, 2003; Allied Advances, Tougher Iraqi Resistance, and a Hunt in the Tigris
By Glenn Collins
March 24, 2003

As allied armored units relentlessly pushed toward Baghdad and a showdown with the Iraqi Republican Guard, allied forces faced the fiercest fighting of the war so far and suffered their grimmest casualty toll. American troops were killed, wounded and captured in firefights, artillery engagements, ambushes and vehicle accidents, while two British pilots were believed to have been the accidental victims of an American missile.

THE ROAD TO BAGHDAD -- The Third Infantry Division battered Iraqi troops north of Najaf, an Islamic holy site, and by evening the long allied armored columns had advanced to less than 100 miles from Baghdad. Coalition forces ringed the cities of Basra and Nasiriya, refraining from direct assaults while the bulk of allied troops flowed northward toward the ''Red Zone,'' the intensely defended area around the Iraqi capital.

Other American and British forces fought fierce battles against determined pockets of Iraqis left behind in the advance. The allies also came under increasing attack from heavily armed Iraqi irregulars assigned to harass the allied forces' progress and to attack support troops behind the swiftly advancing forward columns.

A WRONG TURN -- A nighttime convoy by an Army maintenance company took a wrong turn near the Euphrates River, became separated from the Third Infantry Division near Nasiriya, and was captured. At an afternoon briefing, military officials said that 12 soldiers were reported missing.

Five captured Americans, one of them a woman, were shown on the Arabic satellite television station, Al Jazeera, which also displayed images of what they said were the bloodstained bodies of American soldiers killed in the battle at Nasiriya. Some soldiers appeared to have bullet wounds to the head. Several American cable networks presented still photographs of the dead, without showing their faces.

BRITISH JET DOWNED IN ERROR -- Close to the Kuwait border, an American Patriot missile battery destroyed a British Tornado jet as it returned from a nighttime bombing mission over Iraq. Two British airmen were killed, putting the nation's death count at 16 in the war. The episode raised nightmarish memories of the first Persian Gulf war, in 1991, when nine British servicemen were killed by American fire.

SURRENDERS AND RUSES -- Allied forces continued to accept the surrender of an abundance of prisoners, including two Iraqi generals. But allied commanders were forced to distinguish between the demoralized Iraqis eager to surrender and others who fought hard. Some Iraqis were said to have feigned surrender before attacking American units, and five marines were reportedly wounded when a group of civilians pretended to yield, then opened fire.

''We will be much more cautious in the way we treat the battlefield as a result of these incidents,'' said Lt. Gen. John Abizaid, deputy commander of the United States Central Command.

However, once the secured areas in Iraq are pacified, getting relief supplies to civilians would be a priority, President Bush said. ''That humanitarian aid should begin moving in the next 36 hours,'' he said. ''And that is going to be very positive news for a lot of people.''

PHANTOM PILOT HUNTED -- Television viewers around the world watched thousands of excited Iraqis in the heart of Baghdad as they gathered along an embankment of the Tigris River to hunt for an allied pilot who had supposedly parachuted from a stricken plane.

The Pentagon said no planes were missing, and by the time of an evening news conference in Baghdad, some Iraqis concluded that the whole escapade might have been set off by a hyperactive imagination.

RALLYING FOR THE TROOPS -- Waving American flags and chanting support for the armed forces in Iraq, demonstrators gathered at pro-military events around the country during the first weekend of the war. Some of the rallies were promoted by Clear Channel Communications, the nation's largest owner of radio stations; others by local groups.

Whatever their sponsorship, the events were meant as a vocal protest against the worldwide antiwar sentiment that has been prominently covered on television in recent weeks.

About 10,000 turned out in Glen Allen, Va., and 3,000 in Chicago, and there were smaller rallies in cities that included New York, Richmond, Va., Memphis, and Sacramento, Calif.

HEAVY AIR ATTACKS -- The ferocity of the aerial bombardment of Iraq continued yesterday, as the ''rolling air campaign'' went after military targets throughout the country, while concentrating on the destruction of Republican Guard forces on the outskirts of Baghdad.

A volley of cruise missiles struck important government and military buildings on both sides of the Tigris River in central Baghdad during the early hours on Monday. Landing at intervals of a few minutes, they sent shock waves for miles, and sent clouds of dust and smoke rising from the blasts. GLENN COLLINS
