

A NATION AT WAR: WITH THE TROOPS/THIRD DIVISION; G.I.'s Pause on Push to Baghdad, and One Falls to a Sniper
By Steven Lee Myers
March 25, 2003

One soldier in this division was killed by a sniper's bullet today, as the division consolidated its positions on a broad plateau north of Najaf before what is expected to be a strong assault on Baghdad.

After pushing deep into Iraq over three days, the division's units continued to clash with small pockets of Iraqi forces in and around their positions. There were few indications that the division's armored brigades were prepared to move forward.

Instead, the soldiers and officers concentrated on establishing security over dozens of miles of scrub desert and on bringing up food, water and other supplies after the march northward from the Kuwaiti border.

Army weapons inspectors began searching an ammunition depot seized on Sunday for evidence that Saddam Hussein's government had stored chemical weapons there. The First Brigade's Second Battalion seized the sprawling depot without a fight, capturing 93 prisoners, including one believed to be a general.

The depot -- two and a half miles by five and a half miles in area -- is on a list of the Bush administration's suspected chemical weapons sites, and it was one of the main objectives of the division's rapid advance over the escarpment north of Najaf.

''That's why we cruised up here,'' said 1st Lt. Paul J. Mysliwiec, leader of Company B's Second Platoon, who is from Park Slope, Brooklyn.

The discovery of chemical weapons would give a significant political boost to the administration's rationale for the war -- a thought that seems to be less on the mind of officers here than the desire to ensure the quick capture of any potential sites for storing weapons that might be used against their troops.

Today, two specially equipped armored vehicles from the 51st Chemical Unit from Fort Polk, La., slowly cruised around the compound, its barracks and administrative buildings now deserted. But they detected no chemical traces.

Weapons experts arrived this afternoon but put off a more thorough search until daylight on Tuesday.

Ewen Buchanan, a spokesman for the United Nations weapons inspectors who were withdrawn from Iraq on the eve of the war, said the inspectors had paid three visits to locations in the vicinity of Najaf since November, and had as many as nine more sites in that region to inspect.

It was unclear whether the ammunition depot was one of those sites, Mr. Buchanan said.

All around the depot, which appeared to be used to store artillery shells and other weapons, were abandoned trenches and bunkers, some with large-caliber weapons still concealed in them.

The depot's defenses, including guard posts and electrified fences, suggested that it had once been heavily guarded, but when Company B arrived in armored Bradley fighting vehicles, the small forces defending the depot surrendered quickly.

''Not a shot fired the whole day,'' Lieutenant Mysliwiec said of his platoon's advance on Sunday.

The platoon set up a checkpoint on the road leading to the depot's guardhouse today, and what they encountered underscored the unsettled situation behind the vanguard of the Third Infantry Division.

Almost immediately, the soldiers stopped a taxi with two men claiming to have permission to visit the depot. Shortly afterward, they stopped a battered white Volvo with two more men in civilian clothes. In the trunk, they found 14 AK-47 rifles. All four of the men were detained as prisoners of war. The division now has 1,000 such captives.

Across the flatlands north of Najaf, the division continued to skirmish with irregular forces believed to be members of the Mr. Hussein's Baath Party, as well as fedayeen militia.

The soldier who was killed was part of a tank platoon positioned around the First Brigade, and died from a single shot. The tank platoon returned fire, and killed two Iraqis. Several other Iraqis -- it was not clear how many -- were captured.

Under guidelines imposed by the military, the name and unit of the dead man cannot be made public until his family is notified.

Artillery batteries fired intermittently into the night on Iraqi forces near Najaf, which the Army simply bypassed on Sunday. Iraqi troops have now moved into schools in the city, one officer said, evidently to protect themselves from air and artillery strikes.

Probing attacks continued tonight, when a rocket-propelled grenade was fired at the First Brigade's Second Battalion, Seventh Infantry Regiment.

Across the desert, soldiers continued to find and collect weapons, uniforms and other equipments belonging to Iraqi troops who had either surrendered or fled. Most unsettling were the gas masks that were found, a possible indication of Iraq's intention to use chemical weapons.

''Look,'' said Sgt. Jennifer M. Raichle, an intelligence analyst with the First Brigade, holding up one of the masks. ''They're new.''
