

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD'S DIPLOMACY; Iraqi Minister, Visiting Pope, Warns Europe That a War Would Be Seen as Anti-Muslim
By Frank Bruni
Feb. 15, 2003

The Iraqi deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, warned European countries today not to join or support an American-led military strike against his country, saying that it would be seen as a crusade against Muslims and have bitter consequences.

Speaking at a news conference here just hours after United Nations weapons inspectors delivered their latest report, Mr. Aziz repeatedly described the aims of the United States as imperialist and aggressive, and urged European leaders not to encourage them.

''If other countries, especially here in Europe -- the Christian countries -- if they participate in such a war of aggression, it will be interpreted by the Arab and Muslim world as a crusade against the Arabs and against Islam,'' said Mr. Aziz, who had come to Rome for a meeting today with Pope John Paul II.

''And that's going to disturb and poison the relationship between the Arab and Islamic world on the one hand and the Christian world on the other,'' Mr. Aziz said, later adding: ''Of course this will create reaction of hatred and enmity between the peoples.''

The deputy prime minister's comments signaled a growing intensity in the already heated war of words between Iraqi and American officials, as each side sought to sway international opinion.

Mr. Aziz's visit with the pope earlier in the day was clearly part of the Iraqi effort, drawing attention to the Vatican's frequently articulated opposition to war in Iraq under current circumstances.

So was his lengthy, wide-ranging news conference, during which he took more than a dozen questions from reporters from as many countries. He refused, however, to answer a question from a reporter for an Israeli news organization, saying he had no intention of talking to the Israeli press.

Mr. Aziz said Iraq was already complying with weapons inspections and was prepared to do even more.

''We are doing our best, and we are open for more cooperation,'' he said.

''We will do whatever possible in our hands -- in our capability -- to help them reach the ultimate truth about the absence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq,'' he later added, referring to inspectors.

He also portrayed Iraq as the well-intentioned victim of a voracious superpower intent on war.

''This aggression is baseless, is illegal, is immoral,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''It's an aggression, an imperialist aggression.''

''The main objective of this aggression,'' he continued, ''is to colonize Iraq, to occupy Iraq, impose a pro-American rule on Iraq, dominate the oil of Iraq, and also reshape the whole region of the Middle East according to the American interests and to the interests of Israel.''

Mr. Aziz said Iraq had no relationship with any ''fundamentalist, terroristic group,'' would not look toward Al Quaeda for support in the event of war and did not have the means to attack or be a threat to any other country.

Claims to the contrary by American officials, he said, were ''baseless, and in some cases even ridiculous.''

''They invent scenarios, you see, that Iraq is concealing weapons of mass destruction, chemical and biological weapons, Iraq will give those weapons to terrorists, the terrorists will use those weapons to attack Americans and kill Americans,'' Mr. Aziz said.

''This is a bad American movie,'' he said. ''It's not the reality.''

Mr. Aziz is in the middle of a four-day trip to Italy, which is expected to end on Sunday. He said he came primarily so that he could meet with the pope. Mr. Aziz is a Chaldean Christian, and is scheduled to travel on Saturday to the town of Assisi to pray for peace with Franciscan monks.

A statement released after Mr. Aziz's 30-minute talk with John Paul late this morning said the pope had stressed the need for Iraqi officials ''to faithfully respect, with concrete commitments, the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council.''

The statement also said Mr. Aziz had sought to assure the pope and other senior Vatican officials of ''the willingness of the Iraqi government to cooperate with the international community.''

The Vatican also opposed the Persian Gulf war in 1991, but the objections of Vatican officials to any American-led military strike against Iraq this time around seem, if anything, stronger.

''The last time, there was an invasion of a country,'' Archbishop Michael Fitzgerald, head of the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue, said in an interview this week.

''I think there was a greater reason for the gulf war than for this war, which is a preventive action,'' Archbishop Fitzgerald said.

Mr. Aziz said at his news conference that he carried to the pope a message from the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, that ''the people of Iraq appreciate the principled position taken by the Holy See in refusing the logic of war.''
