
A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | CHOOSING TARGETS; Iraqi Fighters Or Civilians? Hard Decision For Copters
By Dexter Filkins
March 31, 2003

Flying over the urban battlefields that have dogged American forces here, Cpl. Joshua Good often finds himself about to squeeze the trigger on an enemy soldier, only to release it at the last instant when he realizes his target is a civilian.

Corporal Good mans a machine gun on a Huey helicopter, and he has been very busy in the last week. First, he and his crew rushed to Nasariya, where they helped beat back Iraqi soldiers who had attacked Marine convoys. Today, he was flying over the parched plains of Diwaniya, helping to suppress Iraqi attacks on one of the main American columns heading toward Baghdad.

In both cases, as across much of southern and central Iraq, Iraqi fighters have hunkered down in populated areas, where American soldiers say they were using women and children to shield themselves from American bullets.

The practice poses an unusual challenge to the pilots and crewmen trying to attack Iraqi military targets on the ground, and for the men who direct the helicopters to their targets. Iraqis who look like civilians are picking up guns, the pilots say. And Iraqi soldiers, dressed like civilians, are putting their guns away.

For American helicopter pilots, the job of differentiating between the combatant and noncombatant is often impossible.

''There haven't been a lot of targets out there,'' Corporal Good said. ''I may be 99 percent sure of the guy who shot at me, but if I fly back around and he doesn't have a gun and he is standing with a bunch of women and children, then I can't fire.''

The result is a decline in the power to attack Iraqi targets here, one of several factors that has slowed the pace of operations in central Iraq. The problems recall those experienced by helicopter pilots in the Vietnam War, when they often found it difficult to distinguish between civilians and soldiers.

American pilots and soldiers say they have often seen Iraqi soldiers try to blend in or hide behind civilians after shooting at the Americans. Iraqi prisoners of war have often been picked up wearing civilians clothes, and Iraqi civilians have said in interviews that hard-core supporters of Saddam Hussein have been hiding among them.

For Capt. Josh Evans, an air officer with the Marines in central Iraq, directing airstrikes has been more difficult than he ever imagined.

One example he offered occurred last week. Gunfire came from a house, then Iraqi soldiers began to run, and Captain Evans helped direct the helicopters toward the men. But just as a Cobra gunship was preparing to strike, he said, American spotters glimpsed civilians running just behind the Iraqi soldiers. The Cobra was waved away at the last second.

''We had to let the terrorists go,'' Captain Evans said.

Several pilots tell of Iraqi vehicles loaded with people who wave white flags -- common sights here -- only to see the same group pull out guns moments later. When the helicopter circles back, the pilots say, the men in the truck surrender again.

The story is similar to one being told about American forces on the ground: that marines traveling on Highway 1 draw gunfire while heading north, but encounter only smiling faces on the way back south.

The repeated experience of such events has embittered many of those involved in the air war here.

''My perspective has changed totally since I have come out here,'' said Maj. Matt Feringa, a marine who helps direct airstrikes. ''If some guy waves a white flag when a Cobra is over him, and then pulls out a gun once he passes, then I wouldn't let him surrender again. I would call in a Cobra and go get him.''

Helicopter crews say they are often frustrated by their inability to attack Iraqi soldiers who appear to be shooting at them, largely because of the requirement that they make every effort to spare civilian lives.

Maj. Geoff Gilliland, a helicopter pilot, said his Huey recently came under fire from men on a rooftop. When he went after them, they ran inside the building. Seconds later, he said, women and children ran out of the building and into the street.

''We couldn't shoot,'' Major Gilliland said. ''It was too mixed up.''

Still, for all the restraint, the target spotters here say that in such a crowded environment, civilian casualties are almost inevitable. They say they are obliged to avoid civilian casualties when they can, but not if it means sacrificing their own lives.

''The civilians are putting themselves at risk,'' said Capt. John Jaeski, a helicopter pilot here. ''We are not the ones hiding among the women and children. They need to get out of there.''
