
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DOMESTIC DISSENT; In Word, Song and Sign, Demonstrators Across the United States Say No to an Invasion of Iraq
By Jodi Wilgoren
Feb. 16, 2003

Shortly before setting off this afternoon to strut down the spine of this city's neighborhood of South Asian restaurants and shops, Cynthia Castiglione came to Mark Messing, the leader of the newly formed Antiwar Marching Band, with a suggestion.

''What about a fallout?'' she asked. ''At one point, we all just die.'' Mr. Messing agreed, noting, ''We'll need a cue for that.''

Wearing skeleton suits topped with Uncle Sam paper hats, a dozen musicians, and several dozen more marchers tooting kazoos and banging plastic buckets or aluminum pots, turned this city's protest into an upbeat parade, as thousands of people high-stepped to patriotic tunes like ''You're a Grand Old Flag.''

''I think there is a power in fighting hate with joy,'' said Mr. Messing, 45, a musician who pulled the band together over the past week. ''When the bombs fall, it's civilians that get hurt. We're typical festive civilians -- the only problem is, we're dead.'' He was explaining the costumes and stark black-and-white face paint.

The band offered just one of the more creative interpretations of the antiwar message delivered in a coordinated series of rallies in 150 American cities and towns today, part of an international movement expected to bring millions of protesters to the streets over 72 hours.

In Augusta, Me., a few dozen people braved bitter cold to line the edges of the Memorial Bridge, over the Kennebec River. In Miami, about 300 people showed up at the Torch of Friendship, where ''All You Need Is Love'' blared from speakers. In Philadelphia, Quakers walked in silence and Koreans banged drums around the Liberty Bell.

Several thousand protesters gathered in San Jose, Calif., flooding Roosevelt Park.

Carrying a sign reading ''I'm 84 and say no to war,'' and wearing the same Purple Heart-decorated American Army uniform he wore on the battlefields of Italy during World War II, Harold Unsicker said it was the first time he had felt compelled to protest in the streets.

''After the war,'' said Mr. Unsicker, ''I told myself that if I ever get out of this alive, I'm never going to complain about anything again -- except this. I want this war stopped.''

In Colorado Springs, the police fired tear gas at a crowd near Palmer Park. An unknown number of people were arrested or taken to the hospital. A police spokesman said the crowd had ignored orders to disperse. One woman, Paula Bard, 49, said she and her husband had taken their son, Sage, 7, to the rally.

''My son was playing on a slide in the park when they told people to clear the park,'' Ms. Bard said. ''They tear-gassed all the people in the park. My son was scared.''

Here in Chicago, a crowd of about 2,000 spilled out from a convenience store parking lot to fill a full block of Devon Avenue, eight miles north of downtown in the heart of the Indian and Pakistani communities.

Muslim women in hijab huddled next to young men in wool ski caps. The speakers focused on the multicultural coalition of groups that organized the event, but the crowd was mostly white and South Asian, with a sprinkling of black faces. A dozen Buddhists stood holding huge lotus flowers, symbols of peace, they had made out of colored paper and bamboo sticks.

''Just like a lotus flower rises out of the muddy water, we would like to have our society and our government rise above the conflict,'' said Kosu Diane Snider, a middle school science teacher. ''Part of an enlightened society is peace. We're looking for an enlightened response.''

The protesters chanted ''No blood for oil'' and ''No war in Iraq,'' and carried homemade signs. One showed President Bush with his mouth covered. ''Prevent war -- use duct tape,'' it read. Others played off an evangelical motto. ''Who would Jesus deport?'' they asked, and ''What would Jesus bomb?''

With harsh wind piercing 20-degree air, Linda Boyle, a guitarist, said before starting her protest anthem, ''I can't feel my fingers.'' A medic took the stage to warn of the dangers of hypothermia, asking people to watch for neighbors who were shivering or confused.

''Bush! Bush is confused!'' came the response.

The Antiwar Marching Band waved flags and banged drums in a scene that was one part Fourth of July, one part Día de los Muertos. Until Mr. Messing, the band leader, gave the fallout cue.

The young musicians and actors, in their skeleton costumes and macabre makeup, dropped their instruments and fell to the frigid cement, staging a die-in to symbolize the lives a war could cost. The march stopped around them.

Then they got up and began playing, ''Yankee Doodle Dandy.''
