

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE INTELLIGENCE DISPUTE; Senator Insists C.I.A. Is Harboring Iraq Reports
By Neil A. Lewis
Oct. 4, 2002

The chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee asserted today that the Central Intelligence Agency was cutting Congress off from information it needed to carry out its constitutional role as the nation decided whether to wage war against Iraq.

The chairman, Senator Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida, accused agency officials of ''obstructionism'' and said that ''their behavior is unacceptable.'' He spoke to reporters before a public hearing this morning of a special joint Congressional committee investigating intelligence failures before the Sept. 11 attacks.

George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, quickly set up an afternoon meeting with Mr. Graham to address the tension building between the agency and Congress.

''We're trying to carry out a very important responsibility and, given the nature of this classified information, we are the only means by which the intelligence community can communicate to the legislative branch of government,'' Mr. Graham said. ''If they refuse to do so to us, then they are effectively shutting down the people who the Constitution says have the responsibility to declare war and support wars and the intelligence operation that wars require.''

Intelligence officials said that they believed Mr. Tenet told Mr. Graham in their meeting that the agency was not concealing matters from the committee and was providing reports as soon as they were ready.

The committee had made two requests to the agency for national intelligence estimates involving Iraq. Congressional officials said on Wednesday that the agency told them last week that it would not provide one of them, a synthesis of several agencies' views about Iraq's conventional military capabilities. The analysis would include a geopolitical intelligence assessment containing information on agency covert-operations plans in a possible attack on Iraq.

Mr. Graham said the other report the committee sought about Iraq was delivered too late and did not address an important topic the committee had requested. He said the report, which was supposed to assess Iraq's progress in developing weapons of mass destruction, was delivered late Tuesday night, just before a committee meeting on Wednesday morning that was called to consider the issue.

Mr. Graham said the report did not satisfy the committee's request for an assessment of what political impact a Congressional resolution authorizing the use of force would have on Iraq's neighboring nations.

Senior intelligence officials said that the report on Iraq's capabilities to produce weapons of mass destruction was delivered to the committee as soon as it was ready. One official said the 90-page report was written in record time and given to the committee before some senior administration officials received it.

A report on Iraq's conventional weapons capability will soon be ready, the official said, and Mr. Tenet will address some of the issues in a closed committee session on Friday.

Discussing his afternoon meeting with Mr. Tenet, Mr. Graham said this evening that Mr. Tenet had addressed some but not all of his concerns. Mr. Graham said that he still did not have enough information to cast an informed vote on a resolution authorizing force.

Moreover, he said, the agency's answers suggested that the Bush administration had already settled on a policy toward Iraq even though crucial intelligence reports on Iraq's capabilities were still incomplete.

The friction concerning the reports occurred when relations between the agency and Congress were already frayed over several other issues, notably the joint committee's investigation into the failure to recognize the terrorist threat before Sept. 11.

The committee has already yielded evidence of significant lapses at both the C.I.A. and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Today, the special committee heard recommendation for change from former senior officials involved in national security work.

Lee Hamilton, the former Democratic representative from Indiana who had been chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, recommended overhauling the intelligence bureaucracy and creating an intelligence ''czar'' known as the director of national intelligence. Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California and a member of the special committee, today introduced legislation to achieve his proposal.

Mr. Hamilton said that intelligence agencies were too decentralized and often distrustful of each other. ''We need a single cabinet-level official who is fully in charge of the intelligence community,'' he said.

William H. Webster, a former director of both the F.B.I. and C.I.A., disagreed, saying that such a cabinet officer would be ''without any troops'' and might merely duplicate the role of the director of the White House's national security agency.

Next week, the joint committee is to resume its review of Sept. 11 intelligence failures, with testimony scheduled from Louis J. Freeh, the former director of the F.B.I., on Tuesday, and from Robert S. Mueller III, the bureau's current director, and Mr. Tenet on Thursday.
