
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq Tries to Cover Its Bases, Both Diplomatic and Martial
By Neil MacFarquhar
March 10, 2003

Iraq indicated today that it would continue pursuing twin tracks in the face of a looming war -- taking steps to buttress the case of nations opposed to attacking the country while simultaneously preparing for battle.

Lt. Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, Iraq's chief liaison with the United Nations weapons inspectors, played down any concerns over a March 17 deadline in a new draft resolution that would demand that Baghdad prove it has disarmed or face war. The Security Council is expected to vote on the measure this week.

''We are doing are best to meet our obligations and to make any ambiguous points clear,'' the general said at a news conference. ''Whether that takes a week, 10 days, or a month, we are doing everything we can. We are not interested in dates and times.''

The basic fault line between the weapons inspectors and the Iraqi government was starkly evident in the general's remarks.

Hans Blix, the chief weapons inspector, issued a long report on Friday detailing 30 open questions about Iraq's weapons programs and demanding that the country prove what it did with specific quantities of lethal substances. Today, General Amin waved those points away as mere technical details.

''We are working intensively to provide the answers to the questions,'' said the general. ''These technical aspects are being used by the United States and Britain as a pretext to direct their aggressive stand toward Iraq.''

Resolving such issues would rob the United States and its allies of their pretext for going to war, the general said. He also suggested that Mr. Blix might visit the Iraqi capital on March 17, but did not elaborate.

In response to a question, he said, ''I don't know really, but he might visit us on the 17th of this month.'' No immediate confirmation was available from the United Nations in Baghdad.

General Amin said that Iraq expected the United States to go to war no matter what, so all that Baghdad could do was to provide fodder for those countries arguing to give inspections more time.

''There are two conflicting trends, the first calling for an evil war against Iraq and the Arab nation, while the other calls for settling this crisis by peaceful means,'' General Amin said.

''It is not settled yet, neither in the Security Council nor in the political arena,'' he added. ''That is why we are working according to all possibilities. You see that people are training, you see the preparations in all the cities in Iraq, and you see all the efforts Iraq is exerting to cooperate with the inspection teams.''

The centerpiece of that effort at the moment is the continued destruction of Iraq's short-range Al Samoud 2 missiles. Iraq destroyed another six under the supervision of United Nations weapons inspectors today, bringing the total since March 1 to 46. The United Nations has said Iraq built 100 such missiles and had another 20 under construction.

The weapons inspectors have suggested that Iraq could destroy the missiles more quickly, either by exploding them or increasing the number of people working on the demolition. The Bush administration has dismissed the entire project as a sideshow being dragged out by the Iraqis. General Amin criticized President Bush for such remarks, suggesting that he leave such details up to qualified experts.

Among other things, the lingering questions listed in the Blix report said that Iraq might still possess 10,000 liters of anthrax, Scud missile warheads, and pilotless drone aircraft.

General Amin reiterated Iraq's position that it had no weapons of mass destruction and said it was trying to come up with the proof that its lethal stocks of weapons like VX nerve gas and anthrax had all been destroyed.

He also denied accusations that Iraq continued to produce such weapons, for example, using mobile laboratories mounted on the back of heavy trucks that could easily evade inspectors by being constantly in motion.

''You can produce small quantities of biological agents in small laboratories, but they are not weapons,'' he said. ''For weapons you have to produce them in huge quantities and load them into warheads. Such materials can only be produced in huge factories.''

Also today, President Saddam Hussein continued his campaign of showing that Iraq was preparing for war, with state television broadcasting pictures of his meeting with high level military commanders that was also attended by his two sons -- Qusay, who leads the elite Republican Guard, and Uday, who heads a militia.

''Iraq's leadership, people and army are ready for the battle of destiny,'' Deputy Prime Minister Abdel Tawab Mullah Huweish was quoted by the official Iraqi news agency as telling Mr. Hussein.
