

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ; 12 Americans Stage Protest Hussein Is Happy to Allow
By John F. Burns
Oct. 27, 2002

A group of 12 Americans from a Chicago-based pacifist group, Voices in the Wilderness, gathered today to bring the American style of protest to Saddam Hussein's Iraq.

If they had been here to agitate against Mr. Hussein's government, as groups of Iraqis did briefly earlier in the week, they would almost certainly have been treated as the Iraqis were and ordered abruptly to disperse. Like the Iraqis, who were demanding that Mr. Hussein's government account for people who disappeared in the hands of the state security prisons years ago, they might even have been subjected to warning shots fired in the air.

But since the Americans came to protest against President Bush and his threats of war against Iraq, the Iraqi police kept well away, giving the visitors as much time as they needed to make their case.

Standing on the shoulder of the busy highway that runs past the United Nations building here, the Americans -- from New York, Albany, Philadelphia, Indianapolis, Kansas City, Mo., and Spokane, Wash., as well as Chicago -- raised signs reading ''No U.N. Blank Check for Bush,'' a reference to the American campaign at the Security Council for a tough new mandate for arms inspections in Iraq that could be used as a basis for a military attack.

Kathy Kelly, a 49-year-old former Chicago high school English teacher who is a co-founder of Voices in the Wilderness, spoke out against the Bush administration and in defense of positions taken by Mr. Hussein.

At one point, she said she wished that the United States government would follow Mr. Hussein's example in ordering the emptying of Iraq's prisons, a move the Iraqi leader made last Sunday, in part to counter Mr. Bush's descriptions of him as a murdering tyrant.

''I wish people in our country would be willing to show the same spirit of forgiveness and reconciliation to the two million people in our prisons,'' she said.

What was notable at today's protests was not so much that the government left the visitors unhindered, since the Americans were making a case that Mr. Hussein clearly wanted to hear, but that Iraq's state-controlled news organizations were barely represented. The government apparently did not wish to give too much attention to the American demonstrators since that might have sent a signal that street protests are acceptable now, after all.

That left the field to Western reporters, mostly Americans, who outnumbered the protesters by about five to one. What ensued was a curious verbal free-for-all between American reporters and Ms. Kelly.

Ms. Kelly is on her 16th visit to Baghdad, going back to the period of the Persian Gulf war when she and her American companions protesting against the American-led war to drive Iraqi occupation troops from Kuwait camped briefly on the Iraqi side of the desert border between Iraq and Kuwait. In 1996, she helped establish Voices in the Wilderness from her Chicago kitchen for the purpose of campaigning against the United Nations sanctions imposed on Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait.

Those sanctions, greatly eased, remain in place over a decade later as part of the American-led effort to force Iraq to meet the terms of United Nations resolutions calling for it to dismantle its biological, chemical and nuclear weapons programs.

Iraq's contention, considered wildly exaggerated by many who have studied the issue, is that the sanctions have caused more than 1.7 million deaths, including those of a million children, through malnutrition and disease resulting from shortages of food and medicines.

''When I ask myself who has created the greatest threat to the people of Iraq, my answer is, the United States,'' Ms. Kelly said.

Ms. Kelly said Voices in the Wilderness saw its mission in Iraq as giving the world an ''education that is desperately needed'' about America's real aims in Iraq, to combat the ''cartoonized version of foreign policy'' that she said emanated from the Bush White House. The issue for the Bush administration, she said, was not Iraq's weapons of mass destruction but control of its oil.

Asked repeatedly about Mr. Hussein's rights abuses, Ms. Kelly acknowledged there had been excesses in Iraq. But each answer was cast in a way that shifted the topic quickly back to what she sees as America's transgressions.

''I don't think there's any way to sidestep the fact that there have been abuses'' in Iraq, she said. ''However I come from the United States, and my primary responsibility is to speak out against the U.S.A. My responsibility is to speak out against my government inflicting punishment unto death upon hundreds of thousands of Iraqi children under the age of 5.''
