

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUNT FOR WEAPONS; Pattern of Iraqi Cooperation Shifts as a Plant Is Searched
By John F. Burns
Dec. 1, 2002

After the first three days of international weapons inspections, Iraqi officials at suspect sites have already established a pattern sharply different from the hostility that prevailed during inspections from 1991 to 1998. They have been cooperative, have smiled a lot and have been genial, mostly, to reporters who have followed the United Nations inspection teams to the 11 sites visited so far.

But the pattern broke down today, at least as far as the smiles and the geniality were concerned, when the inspectors arrived in a drizzling rain at Al Furat, an industrial plant outside this town about 20 miles southwest of Baghdad.

The Iraqi military officer who is the plant's director general, Brig. Samir Ibrahim Abbas, expressed some irritation about the inspectors interfering with the plant's work, and had much harsher words for the United States, which has identified the plant as one where Iraq appears to have been preparing to resume work on developing nuclear weapons.

Last month, after President Bush issued one of his bluntest warnings of American military action if President Saddam Hussein persists in secret efforts to acquire banned weapons, the White House circulated satellite photographs of Al Furat with an arrow pointing to one of the sprawling buildings on the site.

A notation said new construction on the building appeared to signify an effort to revive the plant's past efforts -- admitted by Iraq in the mid-1990's -- to develop gas centrifuges required for enriching uranium, one of the steps it would have to take to build a nuclear arsenal.

Standing in that building today, Brigadier Abbas said that there had been no construction work of any kind on the site since 1990 and that the bare concrete walls bristling with steel reinforcing rods that rise 20 feet or more above the building's second story were an integral part of the original construction, dating to 1988. If the walls looked like a new addition, he said, it was only because nobody had ever painted them.

''We want people to know that all that has been said about this place by the Americans is a lie,'' Brigadier Abbas said. Asked why the Central Intelligence Agency would want to foster the impression that Al Furat was planning to get back into the nuclear weapons business, he replied, ''Because they are very intelligent and they want to fake a story.''

Why would they do that? Because the United States wanted to find a pretext for going to war with Iraq? he was asked. ''Probably,'' he said, and walked off.

On the first day of the new inspections, on Wednesday, again on Thursday, and once more today, after a break for the Muslim day of prayer on Friday, the Iraqis have been punctilious in meeting the central requirement set in United Nations Security Council Resolution 1441, passed unanimously by the 15-member Council earlier this month: that Iraq give ''immediate, unimpeded, unconditional, and unrestricted access'' to all suspected weapons sites.

At Al Furat today, at an associated plant nearby operated by a company called Umm al-Maarek and at a military unit said by the Iraqis to be specializing in defense against chemical weapons at Balad, 55 miles north of Baghdad, the gates swung open as soon as the inspectors' motorcades arrived.

After every inspection, United Nations officials in Baghdad have noted the cooperation extended to the inspectors by the Iraqis.

Mostly, the inspections have been inside news, as if there were no issue of war and peace hanging by the outcome. But Mr. Hussein's government has not missed the opportunity to make a propaganda point or two, mainly on the failure, so far, of the inspections to show any obvious breaches of Iraq's repeated avowal that it has no weapons of mass destruction left.

The inspectors have studiously avoided any general conclusions from their work so far, saying that it will take time, and more visits, before they can begin to work out the ''mosaic'' that will indicate whether Iraq is telling the truth, or once more trying to conceal banned weapons programs, as it did in the 1990's. But so far, visits to two sites have given the Iraqis an opening to mock some of the allegations that President Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain made as they pressed Council members to adopt the tough new inspections mandate.

The absence of any obvious ''smoking gun'' at either plant prompted the Iraqi Foreign Ministry to publish a triumphant new blast in all the newspapers here on Friday, referring to ''the spuriousness of the allegations and lies'' in a British report about the sites.
