

A NATION AT WAR: THE CASUALTIES; Three Soldiers Who Died In Accidents While In Iraq
By Monica Davey and Lydia Polgreen
March 25, 2003

The last time his former basketball coach saw him, Sgt. Nicolas M. Hodson had turned up at his old high school, dressed proudly in his full Marine uniform.

''You could tell that uniform meant a lot to him,'' said James Horton, who coached Sergeant Hodson in basketball at Smithville High School, in Smithville, Mo. ''I know that made him happy.''

On Monday, Sergeant Hodson was one of three American servicemen that the Department of Defense identified as having died in accidents in recent days while serving in Iraq.

Sergeant Hodson and another soldier, Brandon S. Tobler, Army Reserve specialist, died in separate vehicle accidents, the department said. A third soldier, Cpl. Eric Orlowski, was killed when a machine gun accidentally discharged. The Pentagon gave few details.


Sergeant Hodson, 22, who was with the Third Battalion, Second Marine Regiment, Second Marine Expeditionary Brigade, based at Camp Lejeune, N.C., graduated from high school in Smithville, a middle-class suburb of Kansas City, in 1999. He had moved there three years earlier with his twin sister and mother.

''He was one of those kids everyone liked,'' said Mr. Horton. ''He always tried his hardest to do the best job for the team.''

After graduating and joining the Marine Corps, Sergeant Hodson came back to visit the school two or three times a year. Mr. Horton said his former student sometimes asked him to open up the gym on Sunday evenings so he and his onetime teammates could get in a game or two.

The sergeant, 6 foot 2 inches tall and a good athlete, had dropped some weight as a marine and looked ''like a marathoner,'' Mr. Horton said.

Corporal Orlowski, 26, was killed in an accidental discharge of a .50-caliber machine gun in Iraq, officials said. Family members said they had been told of his death on Saturday.

Corporal Orlowski was assigned to the Second Tank Battalion of the Second Marine Division, based at Camp Lejeune, N.C.

He joined the reserves three years ago, Nicole Kross, his former girlfriend, said.

''He wanted to be a marine from since he was 10 years old,'' Ms. Kross said in an interview at the house in south Buffalo she and Corporal Orlowski had once shared. ''He was really proud of himself -- it was something he always wanted to do and he did it.''

Corporal Orlowski was called up for active duty on Jan. 19, and went to Camp Lejeune and then on to Kuwait. He called his mother at 4:30 Saturday morning, Ms. Kross said, about 10 hours before his death.

He spoke to his sister, his mother and his 3-year-old daughter, Cameryn Lee. Ms. Kross is her mother.

''He talked to Cameryn and told her he loved her,'' Ms. Kross said. ''His mother told me he said, 'We're going in there and everything's O.K.' Ten hours later, the Marines showed up at his mother's door.''

Ms. Kross said she had struggled to explain Corporal Orlowski's death to Cameryn, taking her to the cemetery where her own mother, who died when Ms. Kross was 10, is buried.

''I took her to her grandmother's grave,'' Ms. Kross said. ''I said, 'Grandma's watching over us, and now her daddy is, too.' She said, 'Daddy died?' I said, 'Yes.' And she said, 'Don't worry, Mommy, he's going to go to the hospital and he'll be O.K.'''

Ms. Kross said she and Corporal Orlowski had met at West Seneca East High School and fallen in love, though they never married. Ms. Kross, who is an Air Force reservist, said they remained close -- sharing responsibility for raising their daughter -- even after they split up after six years together.

''I can't believe that he's gone,'' Ms. Kross said. ''He was way too strong. I thought he would have come home for sure. He wrote me three letters and in the last one, he said, 'Please write just to say hi. By the time you get this letter, I'll be in Iraq.' ''

Specialist Tobler, 19, died in a vehicle accident on Saturday in Iraq, the Department of Defense said. Specialist Tobler was assigned to the 671st Engineer Brigade in Portland, Ore.

The Pentagon did not provide information about his hometown and today it defended the slowness with which it was providing information about war casualties. Victoria Clarke, the chief Pentagon spokeswoman, said officials wanted to inform the families of victims first.

''We are working through those processes,'' Ms. Clarke said, ''and when the appropriate notifications have been done and identifications have been done, then we'll put forward the numbers.'' She added, ''A huge factor behind those is sensitivity for the families.''
