

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AIR WAR; Pentagon Shows Videos Of Iraq Firing At Allied Jets
By Eric Schmitt
Oct. 1, 2002

Senior Pentagon officials today showed previously classified video footage of Iraq's efforts to shoot down American and British warplanes patrolling Iraqi no-flight zones, apparently in an American effort to build support for a tough new Security Council resolution on Iraqi weapons.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, gave reporters an unusually detailed briefing using footage from warplane gun cameras and unmanned Predator drones, to underscore a growing number of Iraqi firings on allied planes.

In the two weeks since Iraq said it would allow the unconditional return of United Nations inspectors, it fired on coalition aircraft 67 times -- 28 times in northern Iraq and 39 times in the south -- including 14 times this past weekend, Mr. Rumsfeld said.

''Here you have U.S. and British planes flying daily to enforce the U.N. resolutions, putting their lives at risk, these pilots and air crew, day after day after day for years, and the U.N. not enforcing its own resolutions,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''With each missile launched at our air crews, Iraq expresses its contempt for the U.N. resolutions -- a fact that must be kept in mind as their latest inspection offers are evaluated.''

The no-flight zones, however, were defined independently by the United States and its coalition partners, contending that they were enforcing the general United Nations resolutions requiring Iraq to halt repression of its own people.

In Moscow, the Russian Foreign Ministry suggested that the most recent allied raids on Iraqi air defense sites had been timed to influence talks opening in Vienna over procedures for allowing United Nations inspectors back into Iraq.

''Anglo-American bombing raids in 'no-fly zones' not only deepen the complicated atmosphere around Iraq but create obstacles in the search for a political-diplomatic settlement of the Iraq question,'' the statement said.

Mr. Rumsfeld rejected the Russian criticism, saying it was ''nonsensical'' to blame the United States and Britain for responding to increasing attempts by Iraq to shoot down allied warplanes patrolling the no-flight zones.

In recent days, the Pentagon has taken several steps to illustrate the risk of Iraqi antiaircraft artillery and surface-to-air missiles to allied pilots. These efforts appear to show Iraq's continued belligerence toward the West and to cast doubt on Iraq's commitments to cooperate with the United Nations.

The Pentagon had long refused to release gun-camera footage of the Iraqi firings, saying doing so could endanger pilots. But today General Myers said that is no longer a concern. Mr. Rumsfeld said he learned about the presentation only five minutes before the briefing. But reporters at the Pentagon have known for more than a week that officials were preparing a briefing.

Two weeks ago, Mr. Rumsfeld said American and British warplanes patrolling the no-flight zones had shifted tactics to bombing major air defense sites, a move that military officials said could help clear air corridors for an allied attack. The United States has also increased the tempo of patrols and bombing missions into Iraq, officials said.

At today's news conference, the Pentagon officials said Iraq fired at allied warplanes patrolling the northern and southern zones 642 times in 2000, 647 in 2001 and 416 times this year. But the military does not respond to every firing, and when it does, it is usually a day or two later, they said.

For instance, in response to the 206 firings in the southern part of the country this year, the allies have bombed Iraqi targets on 34 days.

The Pentagon officials acknowledged that the retaliatory strikes had not deterred Iraq from firing on the allied planes. ''It's difficult for us to impose a level of damage that would make it in their interest to adhere to the U.N. resolutions,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Iraq has successfully rebuilt its air defenses to levels that existed before the Persian Gulf war in 1991, and the integrated system, connected by Chinese-made fiber optics, is formidable, the officials said. General Myers said Iraq has ''got a pretty good supply of long-range radars.''

''They don't often move the surface-to-air missiles into the no-fly/no-drive zones,'' he added. ''And when they do, they move them around very, very quickly.''

He said that in recent months the military has changed its tactics to attack their command-and-control and communications buildings ''to try to degrade this, and we've had some success there.''

General Myers said the missions over southern Iraq, flown from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, drew on 6,000 troops and 150 aircraft. The flights in the north, flown from Turkey, require 1,400 troops and 45 aircraft.
