

A NATION AT WAR: HELPING IRAQIS; Continued Fighting Delays Plans for Aid Distribution, Relief Workers Say
By Marc Santora
March 25, 2003

Despite President Bush's assurance on Sunday that large amounts of aid should begin flowing to areas of southern Iraq by Tuesday, relief workers and British military officials who will lead the effort said today that it would be impossible to meet such a timetable.

The situation in southern Iraq, where sporadic fighting continued today, particularly in the port city of Umm Qasr, is so insecure that relief workers say it will take at least several days and probably weeks before aid can really start being delivered into the country.

The situation is most dire in Basra, Iraq's second-largest city, where electricity and water for the city's 1.5 million people have been cut off for the past three days, according to the International Red Cross.

''I have heard a report from the Red Cross that the people in Basra may be facing a humanitarian disaster in that they have no water and they have no electricity,'' Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, told reporters at United Nations headquarters in New York. ''A city of that size cannot afford to go without electricity or water for long. Apart from the water aspect, you can imagine what it does for sanitation.''

After the Persian Gulf war in 1991, when electricity was out for months all over the country, the lack of clean water led to a cholera outbreak.

Military planners had hoped to secure the port at Umm Qasr quickly and get aid moving north almost immediately. But they have met stiffer resistance than they expected and said it was still too unsafe for relief workers.

Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the American who commands allied forces in the region, said today that only half the underwater mines had been cleared from the shipping channels and that allied soldiers continued to fight pockets of Iraqi resistance.

British and American soldiers have also been engaged in heavy fighting around Basra. The Iraqi Red Crescent told the Arab language television station Al Jazeera that 77 people had been killed in allied bombing over the weekend and that the Zubayr Bridge, a key entry to the city from the west, was bombed today.

Still, General Franks said he was confident that aid would be only slightly delayed.

''I think what you'll find is that the people of Basra will, in the days ahead, be able to have more access to food and more access to water than they have had in decades,'' he said, noting that relief may still be weeks away in Basra and days away in Umm Qasr.

British officials said they have a fully laden supply ship, the Sir Galahad, six hours from Umm Qasr and ready to go. They hope to open 12 aid distribution centers there once the ship is in port.

Before the fighting started, the port received 60 percent of the supplies distributed in Iraq under an oil-for-food program operated by the United Nations as an exception to the international embargo of Iraqi oil. About 16 million people in Iraq, two-thirds of the overall population, receive rations from the program.

Keeping distribution centers running is critical to averting widespread starvation, aid workers said.

Western journalists have not been able to work in Basra, and British and American troops remain on the outskirts. But the Red Cross has observers in the city, and they reported that the Wafa al-Qaed water treatment plant, which is run by electricity, has not been working because of a power outage. Although there are other treatment centers, they are only able to supply about 40 percent of the usual needs.

The situation is also complicated by the already poor conditions in Iraq. ''There are 500,000 tons of raw sewage dumped into fresh bodies of water every day, so you can imagine the level of contamination,'' said Geoffrey Keele, a spokesmen for Unicef.

The Bush administration has repeatedly said that getting humanitarian aid to the people of Iraq is a priority. ''In the south of Iraq, our coalition forces have worked hard to make the port area secure to make the transit of humanitarian aid as safe as possible,'' Mr. Bush said on Sunday. ''As I was told this morning in my briefing, that humanitarian aid should begin within 36 hours.''

But the British defense minister, Geoff Hoon, said today that the port may take several more days to be opened. ''I'm not going to allow ships into a dangerous port area whilst there is still fighting going on,'' Mr. Hoon said. ''Nor are we going to take ships into a waterway that has been heavily mined.''
