
A NATION AT WAR: IRAQI-AMERICANS; Immigrants Questioned By F.B.I.
By Danny Hakim With Nick Madigan
March 22, 2003

F.B.I. agents fanned out today in cities across the country, seeking to interview thousands of Iraqi immigrants, particularly those with military or technical backgrounds.

Officials said they had contacted nearly 3,000 Iraqi-born people in the United States since the start of the war to track down any leads they may have about possible sleeper-cell plots connected to the war. Altogether, they said they hoped to contact about 11,000 Iraqi-born people in the United States.

''We're basically asking them if they are aware of any whispered rumors about someone being up to no good,'' said an agent involved in the canvassing who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

Dawn Clenney, a special agent at the F.B.I. office in the Detroit area, said agents were planning to interview about 400 Iraqi immigrants in Michigan, mostly in the Detroit area. ''We hope to have it wrapped up in a few days,'' Ms. Clenney said. Several hundred more are also being interviewed in Southern California.

F.B.I. officials emphasized that the interviews focused exclusively on Iraqi immigrants, as opposed to Iraqi-Americans. But at least one United States citizen, Samey Jawad, 48, of Hacienda Heights, Calif., said he was interviewed on Thursday evening.

''Most of my friends are against Saddam Hussein,'' Mr. Jawad said he told the four agents who interviewed him. ''I told them I support the war as long as we get rid of Saddam Hussein. I told them they disappoint the Iraqi people when they didn't get rid of him in '91.''

Mr. Jawad, an importer of electronic equipment who has lived in the United States for 20 years, said F.B.I. agents visited him in 1991 during the Persian Gulf war. On both occasions, he said, the agents were polite and asked him if he knew anyone in Iraq who might be opposed to the presence of American troops.

Officials said the interviews were voluntary.

''They do not have to talk to us,'' Ms. Clenney said. ''We are not out arresting people. We have some intelligence information we want to obtain, and that's why we are doing these. They can bring a friend, family member or a lawyer. We are going out with hat in hand.''

In Detroit, community leaders reacted with apprehension and support. Some were impressed that Willie T. Hulon, the new special agent in charge of the local F.B.I. office, was aggressively courting them and had laid out the agency's plans in phone conversations. Others were weary of the continuing scrutiny of people of Middle Eastern descent and nervous about the prospect of federal agents showing up unannounced.

''Most immigrants feel a sadness, as if this cloud of uncertainty is on top of all Arab Americans now,'' said Nabih Ayad, a lawyer who was present at two interviews of Iraqi immigrants by F.B.I. agents today.

Mr. Ayad said that agents asked when his clients had been in Iraq, what work they had done there, whether they had served in the military and whether they had family there.

He said the agents also asked: ''If you were in the military, what did you do? What areas of the country were you familiar with? What areas of the country were you familiar with here? What were the names of your family members? What are their occupations? Did they know any Iraqi intelligence officers?''

Saad Marouf, chairman of the Chaldean Federation of America, an umbrella organization of Iraqi Christians in the Detroit area, said that Mr. Hulon told him that agents were interested in people in the technology field, especially ''if they have been associated with the chemical or biological programs.''

''Or, do they know of any people in the United States that have been associated with that who might retaliate against the U.S.?'' he said they had asked.

Advance notice was a concern for many groups, who noted that when thousands of Arab men were questioned after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, they were first warned in letters.

Ms. Clenney said, ''We had time to plan for that then.'' This time, ''we don't have the luxury of time. We're at war right now.''

Bassam al-Hussaini, a mechanical engineer who was born in Baghdad and moved to the United States in 1982, said that he and other members of the Iraqi-American community in Southern California were distressed about the interviews.

''We are very upset,'' said Mr. Hussaini, who lives in San Dimas, 20 miles east of downtown Los Angeles. ''We don't want to be targeted because of our ethnicity.''

''We ran away from the Iraqi regime,'' he said, ''because of the human rights violations there.''
