

A NATION AT WAR: THE QUARRY; U.S. Officials Are Confident That Bunker Held Hussein
By James Risen
March 22, 2003

United States officials said today that they were fairly certain Saddam Hussein and his sons, along with other key leaders, were in the bunker that was a target during the first hours of the attack early Thursday morning in Iraq. But officials said they did not know whether Mr. Hussein and his associates were still alive.

''There are reports that he was wounded, reports that he is dead, reports that he is alive,'' one official said, referring to Mr. Hussein. ''One of those reports is probably right.''

The officials said they believed they did kill some important Iraqi leaders in the raid, although they have not positively identified the individuals.

Intelligence officials said that the sudden attack, which occurred on Wednesday night Washington time, Thursday morning Baghdad time, had led to the nearly complete shutdown in normal communications traffic between the leadership in Baghdad and the Iraqi military.

Some officials expressed exasperation over their inability to determine whether the Iraqi leader had been hit in the attack on a bunker in a residential district of Baghdad.

The absence of regular communications from the Iraqi leadership may help explain why military resistance has so far been scattered and uncoordinated in the face of the United States-led offensive. ''There has been a real decline in the communications from the leadership,'' one American official said. ''There appears to be a state of confusion and disarray in the Iraqi regime, but it is hard to quantify right now.''

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld cautioned, however, that the Iraqi regime probably has various means of communicating with its forces in the field, and that it is still doubtful that the United States, with one blow, succeeded in completely knocking out the Iraqi government's ability to direct its military.

Officials said the absence of communications traffic is one piece of evidence that leads some analysts to speculate that Mr. Hussein may have been badly wounded or killed. For example, neither of the two videotapes of the Iraqi leader broadcast after the attack, although probably genuine, provided concrete proof that he had survived the bombing.

Moreover, they said that the Iraqi regime could easily resolve questions about his status by showing him in a public setting, a step that the Iraqis have so far not taken. But there were so many conflicting reports about his fate that senior intelligence officials said they could not make any conclusive judgments about whether he is still alive.

If Mr. Hussein survived the attack, he might have cut himself off, even from his ruling inner circle, fearing that one or more of his lieutenants was no longer loyal and had played a role in tipping off the Americans about his whereabouts, one intelligence official said.

''If he is still alive, this raid has to have had a major impact on the way he manages his life,'' one official said.

But the official said there was still no new indication that any member of his inner circle had broken with Mr. Hussein, who has ruled through a small group of about a dozen longtime loyalists who have carried his repressive policies.

The raid, which was based on intelligence apparently provided by someone who knew confidential details of Mr. Hussein's movements, one official said, would be likely to fuel Mr. Hussein's long-held paranoia about his personal security.

''After the events of the past few days, Saddam can't trust anyone at this point, even those close to him,'' the official said. ''Here's a guy who's obsessed with personal security, about where he goes, who he meets with and where he sleeps at night. Now he's feeling a lot more vulnerable and more distrustful that he would normally.''

Today, analysts at the Central Intelligence Agency concluded that the voice broadcast on Iraqi television soon after the American attack was Mr. Hussein's. While the agency has concluded that the man on the tape was Mr. Hussein, United States intelligence officials say they are still uncertain whether his television appearance was recorded before the attack. The agency had received some reports that Mr. Hussein had prepared videotaped speeches to be used once the war began.

Agency experts cannot determine the videotape's date and have concluded their analysis, officials said.

The White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, confirmed the findings of the tape analysis but added that there was still not enough evidence to determine the fate of the Iraqi leader. ''There are all kinds of rumors about what has happened to Saddam Hussein and his sons, but there are no concrete facts to report,'' he said.
