

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD ARSENAL; U.S. Lacks Up-to-Date Review of Iraqi Arms
By Eric Schmitt and Alison Mitchell
Sept. 11, 2002

Senior intelligence officials acknowledged today that the government had not compiled an updated, cross-agency assessment of Iraq's nuclear, chemical and biological weapons capacities, although the Bush administration is pressing for a quick statement of support for military action against Saddam Hussein.

Intelligence officials, responding to repeated complaints from Senate Democrats, said today that they were working on the authoritative document. The last such thorough assessment on Iraq's clandestine weapons was produced about two years ago, Senate and administration officials said today.

Senior Bush administration officials have given Iraq's pursuit of nuclear weapons as the main argument that the United States must act now to oust President Hussein, before the Iraqi leader acquires nuclear arms and alters the strategic balance in the Persian Gulf.

But the administration has not yet prepared what is called a national intelligence estimate, the intelligence community's most definitive written judgment on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programs. The document contains the coordinated intelligence assessments from the Pentagon, State Department, Central Intelligence Agency and other government entities and any significant dissenting views.

Some Democrats said they wanted to see such an intelligence estimate before they voted on a Congressional resolution backing military action against Iraq.

''What did we learn from Sept. 11? That we had a failure of coordination of America's intelligence capability,'' said Senator Richard J. Durbin, an Illinois Democrat on the Intelligence Committee. ''Now we're being asked to consider going to war and vote on it within days, and we learn that our intelligence community has not coordinated their efforts to put together this critical document that's essential for us to make this decision.''

George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, and John E. McLaughlin, the C.I.A.'s deputy director, assured senators in classified briefings on Capitol Hill today that the intelligence community was in the midst of producing an updated intelligence assessment on Iraq, which senators and administration officials said could be completed within weeks.

Administration officials and some Senate Republicans sought to play down the lack of an updated national intelligence estimate. Senator Bob Graham, a Florida Democrat who heads the Intelligence Committee, first requested the new analysis on July 22 in a letter to the C.I.A., officials said.

While there are major gaps in what American intelligence knows about Iraq's abilities, there is a large amount of information in the public record, including C.I.A. testimony, reports by United Nations inspectors, and assessments from private groups like the International Institute for Strategic Studies.

''There are a variety of documents out there on the overall W.M.D. threat, which includes Iraq,'' said one American intelligence official, using the initials that stand for weapons of mass destruction.

But Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, said there was no cross-agency judgment on Iraq's unconventional arsenal. ''What I'm looking for,'' he said, ''is the latest compilation that cross-analyzes agency assessments, that really gives you the best, state-of-the-art, up-to-date, full analysis of where they are.'' The national intelligence estimate represents the consensus of the full range of intelligence agencies produced by a rigorous cross-agency review.

''There's a certain extra credibility that goes along with that process,'' said Joseph S. Nye, a former chairman of the National Intelligence Council, which writes the national intelligence estimate.

Even as briefings continued on Capitol Hill, Democrats stepped up their opposition to a Congressional vote before the election.

''Unless there's some absolute urgent necessity to have this debate prior the election, I think it would be a much more thoughtful and constructive and nonpartisan debate if it takes place after the election,'' said Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, a Connecticut Democrat.

Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican leader, said a show of support by Congress would strengthen the President's hand with allies. ''I think people need to know what's going on and where their representatives stand,'' he said.

Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, said that if Mr. Bush insisted on a vote before the election ''I don't think we have much choice but to respect the decision.'' But he added, ''I think that's a deliberative judgment that hopefully will be made in concert and not dictated to the Congress.''

In contrast to many Republicans, Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the House majority leader, continued to sound reluctant to go to war, recalling the failed raid in Mogadishu, Somalia, in 1993 that killed 18 American soldiers. ''It broke our hearts,'' he said. ''So I will need to see a plan before I will cast a vote. I need to see that it's necessary.''
