

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE ARABS; Gulf Leaders Split on Urging Saddam Hussein to Step Down
By Greg Myre
March 4, 2003

Arab leaders debating whether to call on Saddam Hussein to step down peacefully are deeply divided and fearful it could set a precedent that would ultimately threaten their own authority, according to analysts and politicians in the region.

In the latest sign of Arab ambivalence, six Gulf states allied with the United States failed to endorse a proposal today that called on Mr. Hussein to relinquish power as a means of averting war.

Three of the countries, Kuwait, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, were already on record as supporting the idea, and the others, Saudi Arabia, Oman and Qatar, are opponents of Mr. Hussein. But at a meeting in Doha, Qatar, they said the measure needed the backing of the broader Arab world.

''This has to be discussed among all the Arab states to see how this can be implemented,'' Qatar's foreign minister, Sheik Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr al-Thani, said after the meeting.

The inaction was significant because some of the Gulf states are closely linked to the United States, and collectively they host many of the American forces within striking distance of Iraq. So they are considered far more likely to take a tough line with Mr. Hussein than Arab and Muslim countries in general.

Muhammad Said, deputy director of the Al Ahram Center for Strategic Studies in Cairo, said he believed all the Gulf states favored a voluntary departure by Mr. Hussein. ''But they don't want to clearly endorse it because they don't want to be seen as an American tool, and they don't want to set the precedent of Arab countries endorsing the removal of a fellow Arab leader,'' he said.

The critical issue is Arab sovereignty, he said. The United States was able to construct a strong Arab coalition to fight the Gulf war in 1991 because Arab countries saw a threat to their independence when one Arab state, Iraq, invaded another, Kuwait.

This time around, the same principle is working against efforts by the United States to win Arab backing. Arab countries fear that the United States, by forcibly removing Mr. Hussein, would be diminishing Arab sovereignty.

''The United States has explained its objectives in a way that frightens many in the region,'' Mr. Said said. ''There's no doubt that the real purpose is massive change in the Middle East. There's a feeling that it is going to be imposed, and this makes leaders nervous.''

President Bush has said that if Mr. Hussein chose exile, it could prevent a war. But the Iraqi president has given no sign he would go willingly. With Arab public opinion running strongly against American action, Arab leaders are wary of further inflaming public sentiment, and perhaps seeing it directed at themselves.

Ahmad D. al-Duaji, a Kuwaiti legislator, said such concerns were real. ''There are many governments in the region who are close to Saddam in ideology who fear they could be next,'' he said today in Kuwait City.

The ailing leader of the United Arab Emirates, Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan, was the first Arab head of state to call for Mr. Hussein to step aside, doing so in a statement he sent Saturday to an Arab League summit in Egypt.

But tensions between the league's 22 members resulted in public bickering, highlighted by a spat between the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia.

The Arab League produced only a broad statement opposing a United State-led war and seeking a peaceful solution to the Iraq crisis, and the feud continues to play out.

Libya said it would recall its ambassador to Saudi Arabia, according to the country's official JANA news agency. Meanwhile, Colonel Qaddafi was in Cairo today and repeated a longstanding threat to pull Libya out of the Arab League, saying his country was ''basically an African state,'' Egypt's official Middle East News Agency reported.

Arab countries appear far too fractured to effectively lobby the Bush administration against a war, analysts said. Those same fault lines are likely to hamper American efforts to reconstruct Iraq and stabilize the region if a war takes place and Mr. Hussein is deposed, they added. ''Arab countries are not trying to protect the Iraqi regime, they are protecting themselves,'' said Imad Fawzi Shueibi, a political scientist at the University of Damascus.

If Mr. Hussein stepped down, it could lead to additional calls by the United States to oust Arab leaders, and ''Arab countries would be pressured to interfere and hand over the targeted country to the United Nations,'' he said.
