
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; U.N. Delegates Wait for Bush to Make Case Against Iraq
By Julia Preston
Sept. 11, 2002

Five days of phone calls and intensive consultations by President Bush with world leaders have helped ease fears that the United States would sidestep the United Nations and initiate a swift attack on Iraq on its own, diplomats said today.

But as the delegates waited anxiously for Mr. Bush's speech here on Thursday, when he will make his case for confronting Iraq, there was no sign that the United States could count on immediate Security Council support for a military strike.

Diplomats acknowledged that the Bush administration's campaign since late August to accuse the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, of building weapons of mass destruction had electrified the United Nations.

It has forced the Security Council to recognize that it must do more to press the Iraqis to comply with a stack of resolutions that they have not respected. In particular, Council diplomats expressed new urgency about securing the return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq.

The 57th session of the General Assembly was inaugurated today with customary pomp and protocol, admitting Switzerland as a United Nations member in one of its first items of business. As recently as a few weeks ago, representatives of most nations thought the effort to curb terrorism would be the hot topic of the eight-day debate that opens the Assembly, in which more than 50 government leaders will speak.

But the Bush administration effectively shifted the attention to Iraq. Unexpectedly for many nations, American officials have not phrased their opposition to Mr. Hussein in terms suggesting that he is supporting terrorism against the United States. Mr. Bush is contending that Mr. Hussein is building some of the world's most lethal chemical, biological and perhaps nuclear weapons and that as a result, ''regime change'' is necessary in Iraq.

In his speech, administration officials said, President Bush plans to review the resolutions the Security Council has adopted on Iraq since the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991, citing chapter and verse of Mr. Hussein's failures to comply, in the American view.

Mr. Bush will challenge the United Nations to take action to enforce its own measures, the officials said, making it clear that the United States can act alone if it does not get support. His approach is intended to satisfy American allies, notably President Jacques Chirac of France, who have insisted that the strategy against Iraq must pass through the Security Council.

With tactical discussions still under way in Washington, American diplomats here have not yet begun to circulate a specific proposal for a new Security Council resolution or to consult with other missions on possible phrasing.

The Security Council's distance from a measure that could lead to a military assault on Iraq was evident at a closed meeting today at which it heard a report from Hans Blix, the leader of the team of United Nations biological and chemical weapons inspectors.

Mr. Blix confirmed that commercial satellite photography indicated that Iraq had ''rebuilt a good deal'' at industrial sites related to weapons production that United Nations inspectors surveyed before they left Iraq in 1998. Some of the sites were bombed by the United States and Britain in December 1998, Mr. Blix said, and photographs show that Iraq has been reconstructing them. But he said his team could not draw any conclusions until it was able to inspect them on the ground.

After the meeting, Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian ambassador, told news organizations that Moscow was intent on securing the inspectors' return.

''We all want to make sure that the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq are not resumed, and everyone in the Security Council agreed that the speedy return of inspectors is in everybody's interest, including the Iraqi population and regional security,'' Mr. Lavrov said. But he added that Russia would not agree to giving Iraq an ultimatum backed up by a threat of force.

''We are against ultimatums in principle,'' Mr. Lavrov said. He said any measures to pressure for renewed weapons inspections should include clearer terms for when the tough sanctions on Iraq would be lifted.

China, another permanent, veto-bearing member of the Council, insisted on continuing to seek a diplomatic solution. United States diplomats, by contrast, said they doubted that Iraq would allow the inspectors to return or would allow them to work if they did.

But many diplomats today echoed the view of Secretary General Kofi Annan when he heard last week that Mr. Bush was embarking on a round of diplomacy before taking action. ''He's relieved,'' his spokesman said.
