

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; 'Big 5' at the United Nations Still Jockeying Over Iraq Text
By Julia Preston
Oct. 23, 2002

In intense negotiations, the United States and Britain pressed the other three permanent members of the Security Council today to accept a draft resolution on Iraq that includes no explicit authorization of military action but leaves the way open for Washington to go to war.

After the United States presented a revised draft on Monday, the permanent members, who hold veto power, met twice today for discussions. Council diplomats said the talks were moving forward, but Washington continued to face resistance from France and Russia to its bid for one resolution that would provide the minimum legal foundation for an American attack on Iraq.

In what American and British diplomats regarded as an important advance, France said today that it would not present a competing resolution, but would negotiate on the basis of Washington's revised draft.

The French Ambassador, Jean-David Levitte, also praised a phrase in the new draft that calls for the Council to ''convene immediately'' if United Nations weapons inspectors find that Baghdad is balking. This passage is a nod to France, which has insisted on two stages, reserving authorization of force for later, in the event that inspectors report that Baghdad is failing to disarm.

But according to Council diplomats, France asked for clarification of what it saw as ambiguities in the proposal, questioning precisely the new passages that Washington hoped would bridge its deep gap with Paris over when to use force.

In Washington, Pentagon officials said Iraqi acceptance of a Council resolution and renewed weapons inspections could delay military action. No ordered deployments have been delayed, Pentagon and military officials said, and no exercises have been postponed, but they said they were awaiting the final resolution before deciding whether to reschedule deployments.

The United States ambassador at the United Nations, John D. Negroponte, hinted at both progress and strains this evening.

''We've put on the table a text of a resolution which we believe, if Iraq were to cooperate, could achieve disarmament,'' he said. ''Every country brings its own perspective and point of view to these issues, and these things have to be thrashed out and discussed.''

He said the United States still hoped to achieve a consensus among the permanent members, but wanted at least ''a sufficient level of understanding between us so that there is no veto in the offing.''

The revised text no longer includes a full authorization to use ''all necessary means'' against Iraq if it fails to disarm. But American officials argued that a careful juxtaposition of three key paragraphs provides the legal grounds that Washington seeks.

In the first of the ''operative paragraphs,'' the Security Council ''decides that Iraq is still, and has been for a number of years, in material breach of its obligations under relevant resolutions.'' The Council would also decide that this ''material breach'' would be compounded by even minor new violations by Baghdad, such as inconsistencies or omissions in Iraq's arms declarations, which are supposed to guide the inspectors.

The draft resolution then ''recalls that the Council has repeatedly warned Iraq that it will face serious consequences as a result of its continued violations of its obligations.''

In the Council's arcane parlance, Iraq's ongoing breach of past edicts would in itself be sufficient grounds for a more forceful response by Council members, American officials said.

The resolution would then remind Iraq that it was warned as long ago as 1991 that it would face ''serious consequences'' for its violations, which can be taken to mean war.

This phrasing is what awakened suspicions by France and Russia that it might be a ''hidden trigger,'' one diplomat said. But administration officials said that if these passages are further softened, there will be no credible threat to President Saddam Hussein to give up his weapons of mass destruction.

Differences also remain over the new terms guiding the inspections, but diplomats on all sides said they were likely to work those out if the major issues were resolved.

Mr. Negroponte suggested that the United States was not prepared to bend much further. ''In the end, the proof of the pudding is going to be in the eating,'' he said. ''It's going to be whether we get a resolution or not.''

Council diplomats said they expected that the comments on the draft would be reported back to Washington tonight. One diplomat said the pace would now depend on ''the capacity in Washington to agree among themselves,'' referring to policy disputes in the Bush administration that seem from here to have bedeviled the negotiations.
