
THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE DISSIDENTS; Hussein's Foes Put Off Talks In North Iraq; Safety Is Issue
By Judith Miller
Jan. 16, 2003

The Iraqi opposition yesterday postponed for at least two weeks what was supposed to be the first meeting of dissidents on Iraqi territory in a decade after Bush administration officials said the United States could not guarantee security, according to Iraqi dissidents and administration officials.

About 65 opponents of President Saddam Hussein had been scheduled to meet on Jan. 22 in Salahuddin, a former resort town 30 miles northeast of Erbil, in the Kurdish-controlled no-flight zone of northern Iraq. But in meetings with Kurds and other dissidents this week, Zalmay Khalilzad, the White House special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, said that the administration would prefer more time to provide the kind of security that the Kurdish groups in northern Iraq had requested.

Several dissidents said that the delay -- until Feb. 5 -- means that if military conflict erupts before then, the meeting might not take place at all. They also said that Iran had offered to have the meeting on its territory if the dissidents wanted to stick to the originally scheduled date.

But a Kurdish leader and administration officials said that the Kurdish hosts of the session had decided to postpone the conference for purely security and logistical reasons, and that they were still determined to meet on Iraqi soil before a conflict to designate a small group of opposition figures to help lead a transition to democracy once Mr. Hussein is gone.

''We are determined to have this meeting inside Iraq. That is where the world and Saddam Hussein will take this seriously,'' said Hoshayr Zebari, a senior official of the Kurdistan Democratic Party.

But several dissidents, surprised and angered by the delay, said the decision cast into doubt the Bush administration's commitment to having an independent opposition play a significant role in a post-Hussein Iraq.

Francis Brooke, the Washington-based adviser to the Iraqi National Congress, the opposition's main umbrella group, said that the White House had known since the first successful meeting of Iraqi dissidents in London last December that a second meeting was scheduled to be held inside Iraq in mid-January. ''When the United States publicly commits to support a meeting at a certain date, and when that commitment is not met, it casts the commitment into doubt in the minds of the Iraqi opposition,'' Mr. Brooke said.

Danielle Pletka, vice president of the American Enterprise Institute, said the delay signaled ambivalence among some administration officials about the creation of a provisional government run by Iraqi dissidents once Mr. Hussein is ousted. She said recent reports indicating that the administration favored an American military occupation of Iraq and transitional rule not by Iraqi dissidents, but by United Nations officials, suggested that the United States was ''dreaming of an Iraqi-free zone in post-Saddam Iraq.''

''Now we see who is really in disarray,'' she said, dismissing frequent criticism of the Iraqi opposition-in-exile as inept, politically divided, and unable to map out a coherent political role for itself in a future Iraq.

Mr. Zebari and administration officials rejected such criticism, insisting that the Kurds had made the decision to postpone the session in northern Iraq. ''The U.S. was, and remains prepared to send a senior delegation to the meeting in northern Iraq when the Iraqis convene,'' a senior administration official said.

He also noted that Washington had provided security for northern Iraq for over a decade, and remained committed to doing so. ''We look forward to working with the free Iraqis in the struggle against Saddam Hussein,'' the official said.

Another administration official noted that there are several reasons for concern about security. In addition to anxiety about what Mr. Hussein might do to try to disrupt the meeting or harm participants, the Kurdish part of Iraq was also the base of Ansar al-Islam, a group of some 600 armed Iraqi and Arab Islamic militants who the official said are ''affiliated with Al Qaeda'' and have been battling Kurdish forces for over a year.

''Iraqi opponents of Saddam will be unable to play any role at all in a post-Saddam Iraq if they are dead,'' the official observed. ''I think the Kurds were justifiably nervous about hosting a meeting without adequate security.''

Mr. Zebari dismissed concern about Ansar al-Islam, saying it was no threat to the meeting.

Some Iraq experts said that the Kurds had only requested additional security at the beginning of this week. Mr. Khalilzad told Iraqi dissidents at several meetings in the last three days that extra protection was not possible now, but might be available in early February.
