

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE PRICE; U.N. Estimates Rebuilding Iraq Will Cost $30 Billion
By Julia Preston
Jan. 31, 2003

The United Nations, stepping up the pace of its contingency planning for rebuilding Iraq after war, has concluded the costs will run to at least $30 billion in the first three years, according to the organization's top development official.

Mark Malloch Brown, head of the United Nations Development Program, appealed for urgent attention to the enormous job of rebuilding Iraq if the United States and its allies go to war there. Despite Iraq's oil wealth, United Nations planners calculate that it will be a far more expensive and complex task to rebuild than Afghanistan, where the world organization is currently leading the reconstruction effort.

The United States will decide in coming weeks whether to undertake military action without the blessing of the Security Council, or to press on with negotiations to garner wider international support. If the Bush administration opts for early war over the objections of France, Germany and other nations that want to give United Nations weapons inspections more time, it will be certainly be more difficult to secure those nations' help with the costs of reconstruction, diplomats here warn.

In an interview today, Mr. Malloch Brown was careful to say that the planning exercise does not mean he has concluded that war is inevitable.

But Secretary General Kofi Annan, watching Washington's confrontation with Saddam Hussein intensify, has quietly urged his organization to accelerate its preparations to handle a major postwar crisis in Iraq.

''I am looking at a situation of potential mass human vulnerability and need,'' Mr. Malloch Brown said. ''I've got to be ready for whatever comes.''

Since United Nations economic sanctions were imposed in 1990 to punish the Iraqi government for invading Kuwait, Iraqis have been in a downward spiral on the development chart. Once a rising oil-rich nation with a thriving urban middle class, Iraq is on the dole, with 60 percent of its people dependent on government-distributed food rations and a per capita income of not more than $700 a year.

''This is a very damaged place that needs enormous assistance,'' Mr. Malloch Brown said. He cautioned that Iraq would not be able to rely on a renewed gusher of oil to pay for its own reconstruction. The Iraqi oil industry is in disrepair after more than a decade with little investment, and will require a huge new flow of capital to restore it to global competitive standards.

But after Mr. Hussein stopped paying most of his debts in response to the sanctions, the country now faces at least $60 billion in commercial and official debt, by United Nations estimates, as well as $170 billion in unpaid reparations to Kuwait stemming from the invasion. Much of Iraq's debt is to countries in the former Soviet Union, with Russia the biggest creditor.

While a new, United States-backed government may be able to renegotiate some of the reparations, it will be politically difficult to achieve debt relief for Iraq without offending many other countries, particularly in Africa, which have been pleading for debt pardons.

Until Iraq straightens out its debts, United Nations planners believe, it will be difficult to get the major investments needed to revive the oil industry. Oil production has dropped from 3.5 million barrels a day before the last war to 2.1 million barrels a day, providing up to $13 billion a year. If production increased under a new government to $16 billion a year, it would still be barely enough to pay for basic needs and repairs after a war.

The effort in Afghanistan is expected to cost up to $6.5 billion for the first 30 months. But Afghanistan was a bitterly poor country whose people lived a self-sufficient subsistence based on farming and herding, in contrast to largely urban society in Iraq.

Even for Afghanistan, where the ouster of the harsh Taliban government drew broad international support, Mr. Malloch Brown said he had to ''really go around and shake the can'' to raise money.

Aid groups that work in Iraq have warned of a severe relief crisis if bombing damages Iraq's cities. They point out that, during more than a decade of hardship, Iraqis have spent down any financial reserves they once had, and if the food rations are disrupted, people will quickly face hunger.

But besides the United States and Britain, no other nation wants to finance contingency planning for Iraq, officials said, because it makes them appear to be endorsing war. United Nations agencies recently appealed for $37 million to begin planning, and got no response.
