
THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 16, 2003; An Ultimatum, Frayed French Relations and Stockpiling in Iraq
By Robert D. McFadden
March 17, 2003

War with Iraq appeared to be just days away. In an ultimatum to the United Nations, President Bush said that Monday would be the last day for diplomatic maneuvering to disarm Saddam Hussein. ''We concluded that tomorrow is a moment of truth for the world,'' the president said after his summit meeting in the Azores with Prime Ministers Tony Blair of Britain and José María Aznar of Spain.

Monday is the disarmament deadline in an American-backed British resolution before the United Nations Security Council, and presumably the last day it could be voted on. But there appeared to be little chance for the measure. Nine votes needed to pass it were not lined up, and France has vowed a veto anyway.

A LAST PUSH -- Allied leaders said a final round of contacts would be made overnight to get six undecided votes on the 15-member Security Council and to pressure France to abstain. But it seemed hopeless. The French president called for 30 more days for Iraq to disarm -- Vice President Dick Cheney rejected that idea -- and the allied resolution will probably be withdrawn if it cannot win.

Mr. Bush, who has said he will go to war with a ''coalition of the willing'' and bypass the United Nations if it fails what he calls a test of relevance, was clearly angry at the diplomatic impasse. ''Tomorrow is the day that will determine whether diplomacy will work,'' he said. ''Saddam Hussein can leave the country if he's interested in peace.''

FRICTION WITH FRANCE -- The Bush administration was also angry with France. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell openly suggested that Paris had been influenced by a long history of ''commercial relationships'' with Mr. Hussein, and that Franco-American relations had been damaged, at least in the short term. With some bitterness, American officials looking back over recent months say that France never intended to support an American-led war with Iraq, although the French foreign minister, at a dinner with Mr. Powell in New York in September, suggested otherwise.

EDGING TO THE BRINK -- If diplomacy is exhausted, analysts say, President Bush could quickly move America to a war footing, addressing the nation as early as Monday night, and perhaps issuing yet another ultimatum, giving Mr. Hussein 48 or 72 hours to disarm, run for it or face war. There seemed to be little chance of his giving in, but foreign diplomats, aid workers, journalists and others inside Iraq would gain a few days to get out before the bombing began.

More than 250,000 American and British troops are in the region, ready to invade. Every day, pilots aboard five aircraft carriers in the Persian Gulf fly over Iraq, getting familiar with the territory. In Kuwait, troops in desert camps wait restlessly for orders to move out, and intelligence officers gather data that will be vital if and when the fighting starts. But Kuwait City seems tranquil, its residents secure in the belief that they are safe.

INSIDE IRAQ -- It is a different story in Baghdad and other Iraqi cities, where war preparations are feverish. Iraqis are stocking food, water and other supplies; lining up at gasoline stations; mobbing pharmacies for antibiotics; and sandbagging positions outside government buildings. Many nations are urging their citizens to get out, and an exodus of diplomats and others has begun.

Iraq destroyed two more banned missiles, but a defiant Mr. Hussein predicted a ''great confrontation,'' with Iraqi troops inflicting ''big losses'' on the invaders. Strategically, he divided Iraq into four military zones and put his son Qusay, a cousin and two trusted political aides in charge of them, choosing loyalty over military skill, apparently to make it harder for army commanders to defect and take units with them.

STRONGHOLD BAGHDAD -- Senior American military officials say Iraq has ringed its capital with air and ground defenses more formidable than those in 1991, but has left overall defenses across the country weaker. The Americans say Baghdad is a hornets' nest of surface-to-air missiles, antiaircraft artillery and heavy machine guns.

Trenches surrounding Baghdad are being filled with oil, which could be set on fire to obscure battlefield targets. But the tactic, reminiscent of an old movie about holding off army ants invading a plantation, seems primitive in an age of satellite-guided missiles. American commanders speak confidently of a quick, decisive victory and of anticipating meager resistance from Iraqi troops who, they say, have no hope on the battlefield. ROBERT D. McFADDEN
