

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; Envoys Abandon Scripts on Iraq And Bring Emotion to U.N. Floor
By Felicity Barringer
Feb. 15, 2003

It was supposed to be a moment for dueling bugles, with the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, rallying his troops against the rush toward war in Iraq, and the American secretary of state, Colin L. Powell, rallying his against any delay in the disarmament of a dictator.

The bugles did indeed sound the prescribed notes -- but with a spontaneity that gave uncommon depth and resonance to the confusion, division and anger over Washington's monumental war preparations.

Around the horseshoe table of polished Norwegian wood in the Security Council today, the debate sounded surprisingly personal.

Most of the diplomats transcended their scripts, bringing emotion and exasperation to an arena steeped in rote routines, and the audience responded in kind.

In a breach of decorum seldom witnessed in the protocol-conscious chamber, applause broke out as Mr. de Villepin concluded his bugle call by evoking the ideas and conscience of ''La France.''

''This message comes to you today from an old country, France,'' the translator of Mr. de Villepin's remarks intoned through the large white earpieces that gave the roomful of more than 400 people a vaguely alien appearance.

''It wishes resolutely to act with all the members of the international community. Faithful to its values, it believes in our ability to build together a better world.''

Before the translation ended, the applause began in the gallery; on the Council floor, only the Syrian foreign minister tapped his hands together.

At the head of the table, to the right of the German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, the secretary general, Kofi Annan, pushed the points of his fingers against each other, bending and straightening them in a slow series of mini-push-ups. Mr. Powell sat stone-faced as the momentary applause ended.

The most notable exceptions to the emotional tone of the day were the recitations of the arms control inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, whose controversial findings -- widely seen as giving ammunition to the pro-inspections forces -- were offered in the monotone of diplomacy.

Outside the chamber, United Nations workers, security guards with earpieces and grim looks, and anxious journalists merged into the steady stream of people passing by the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize on display in the lobby and trotting up and down the escalators that connect the lower floors of the building.

The crowds were not as thick as they had been on Feb. 5, when Mr. Powell presented the United States' case against Iraq, or even Jan. 27, when Mr. Blix gave his first report, but there were enough extra people to cause small traffic jams at the metal detector that led to the Council floor.

The front of the building was lined with almost as many police cars as limousines, while across the street demonstrators held up sheets with legends like ''No War With Iraq.'' One woman draped herself in an American flag and chained herself to the iron fence on the building's north side.

Her gesture had its echo inside the Council chamber, as one diplomat after another wrapped himself in his country's history.

Mr. de Villepin began, provoking chuckles around the room by adopting Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's derisive epithet for France and Germany as his own and declaring that he was part of ''old Europe.''

Tang Jiaxuan, the foreign minister of China -- which, along with France, Germany and Russia is at the core of the coalition of the unwilling -- followed by saying he represented an ''ancient civilization.''

Not to be outdone, the British foreign minister, Jack Straw, evoked guffaws when he began, ''I speak on behalf of a very old country founded in 1066 by the French.''

When it was Mr. Powell's turn, he pressed his palms together prayerfully, tapped them on the desk for emphasis and, barely looking at his notes, began his impassioned appeal. He called the United States ''a relatively new country on the face of the earth,'' but ''the oldest democracy that is assembled here around this table.''

He laced the rest of his remarks with personal references, declaring near the end, ''Force should always be a last resort; I have preached this for most of my professional life as a soldier and as a diplomat; but it must be a resort. We cannot allow this process to be endlessly strung out, as Iraq is trying to do now.''

But, as personal and as forceful as his remarks were, there was no applause for Mr. Powell. He was playing his bugle for the wrong audience.
