

A NATION AT WAR: DIPLOMACY; Flying Between Enemies, Hoping to Land in a New Iraq
By Frank Bruni
March 31, 2003

It is not such a long way from here to northern Iraq.

But every time Zalmay Khalilzad moves between the two, he travels a roundabout route that speaks volumes about the tensions at play in the war and in the Turkish-Kurdish rivalries that will linger afterward.

The military plane that carries Mr. Khalilzad, the American special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, makes an inconvenient stop in Romania, because Turkish leaders did not want flights between their country and the Kurdish region of Iraq, which they regard with suspicion.

So he loops far north to swing back south, a logistical metaphor for the difficulty that the United States faces in managing the various groups at the core and on the edges of the conflict in Iraq.

It is Mr. Khalilzad's charge to make sure that after the war in Iraq, what comes out is a stable country, equipped to manage its ethnic and religious divisions and to live at peace with its neighbors, Turkey foremost among them.

But Mr. Khalilzad, 52, a senior official on the National Security Council, in charge of Central Asia and the Persian Gulf, sees his mission in a far wider and more challenging context.

He said that in the same way a previous generation had to confront the Soviet Union, this one must work for ''the transformation of the Middle East and the Islamic world at large.''

''It's the historic challenge of our time,'' he said, then conceded: ''It's a long-term challenge. I'm not projecting that it's something that can be done in the course of this administration.''

He is well aware of how the war is playing in much of the Muslim world: not as an effort to liberate Iraq, but as an attack against Islam. Mr. Khalilzad, a Muslim who was born and reared in Afghanistan before earning a doctorate from the University of Chicago and teaching political science at Columbia University, has a different view.

''I believe that the Islamic world is going through a crisis of civilization, so to speak,'' he said, adding that it had chosen to blame the United States for its poverty and troubles.

Although the war may not change that, he said, ''I think that we will be judged by what we do in Iraq when the war is over. If we leave Iraq a much better place than we found it, it could have an important strategic effect on shaping attitudes.''

He finds himself at the center of the current war, just as he was at the center of the last one, devising administration strategy for Afghanistan and helping to assemble a post-Taliban governing coalition.

His thinking reflects his close relationships with administration hard-liners like Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary. Mr. Wolfowitz has spoken often of the need to transform the Middle East, and the potential of the war in Iraq to act as a catalyst for such change.

The immediate problems facing Mr. Khalilzad have a narrower focus. As he mingles with Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq and attends to the anxieties of Turkish officials here in the capital, he acknowledges that the job is more difficult than he imagined.

''They really don't trust each other,'' Mr. Khalilzad said in an interview on Saturday night, referring to Turks and Kurds and his immediate concern: making sure that Turkish troops do not enter northern Iraq and clash with Kurds.

One motivation for Turkish troops to go in would be any sense that Kurds were angling for an independent state. He said that he has come to believe the Kurds' assurances that they will not do that, but that Turkish officials remain unconvinced.

''The Turks have an attitude toward the Kurds that you can't trust them,'' he said. ''It's surprising, to use the kind of words I normally use in my line of work, how they 'worst-case' each other's intentions.''

Mr. Khalilzad was in Ankara to try to set up a committee of American, Turkish and Kurdish representatives that would address evolving Turkish concerns about northern Iraq so that Turkish military action could be avoided. He had not yet succeeded, despite weeks of effort.

Mr. Khalilzad has miscalculated before. During the Reagan presidency, when he worked at the State Department, he helped channel aid to militant religious groups in Afghanistan that were successfully fighting the Soviet Union. But when the Taliban subsequently rose to power, Mr. Khalilzad initially maintained that the movement was not hostile to the United States.

Later, he conceded, ''We learned more about them.''
