

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN OVERVIEW -- MARCH 8, 2003; Squabbling Diplomats, a Mixed Report Card From Iraq and a Ticking Clock
By Robert D. McFadden
March 8, 2003

What President Bush has called the final phase of diplomacy in America's countdown to war with Iraq devolved into a war of words at the United Nations. Two United Nations weapons inspectors established the framework with a mixed report, citing notable progress in finding and destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, but also notable Iraqi reluctance to disclose information needed to disarm Saddam Hussein.

In the Security Council, the United States, with Britain and Spain nodding assent, focused on Iraqi foot-dragging and said time was running out. France, Germany, Russia and China were equally firm against military action and called for more time. With 250,000 American and British troops in the Persian Gulf ready to attack, the major powers seemed more divided than at any time since the cold war.

INSPECTORS' REPORT -- Hans Blix, the United Nations' chief weapons inspector, told the Council that Iraq's destruction of 34 Al Samoud 2 missiles was a ''substantial measure of disarmament,'' and that Baghdad had begun to provide information on biological and chemical weapons. Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief nuclear arms inspector, was also cautiously optimistic, saying there was no evidence that Iraq had revived its nuclear weapons program. While Mr. Blix said more time was needed, he asserted that further inspections ''will not take years, nor weeks, but months.''

A DEADLINE -- Echoing President Bush's nationally televised warning Thursday night, representatives of the United States, Britain and Spain spoke of days, not months, remaining before military action. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell dismissed Mr. Blix's talk of Iraqi cooperation, saying Baghdad had no intention of destroying he called an arsenal of hidden weapons.

Continue reading the main story
Britain, with American and Spanish support, called for a March 17 deadline for Iraq to disarm completely or face invasion, but worded the resolution in a way that made it a referendum on Iraqi compliance with United Nations disarmament demands, not an implicit endorsement of war. It was offered as a compromise to unite a deeply divided Security Council. But France, with veto power, said it would not allow it to pass. Germany said it was hard to believe the world would opt for war if there was a chance for peace; Russia and China insisted there was still time to work things out: statements that translated as no votes.

It was a tense, emotional day in the usually staid Security Council chamber. Diplomats wagged fingers and voiced exasperation at one another. A French delegate walked out to show his pique, and an aide to the Secretary General said he half expected a show of shoe-banging on a table, as Nikita Khrushchev did long ago.

DEFINING MOMENT -- The troubled talk in the Council was about disarmament and inspections, missiles and deadlines. But the subtext was all about the future of nations and their capacity to work together. The failure to find a compromise on Iraq -- and compromise seemed increasingly remote -- raised a hard question: would the United Nations survive as the primary instrument of collective action?

Many people hoped so. Responding to President Bush's warning of imminent military action, political leaders, editorial writers and ordinary people around the world braced for war. But surveys and opinion polls found little popular support for it, and strong support for having the Security Council approve of any invasion.

A REVELATION -- Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the No. 3 Al Qaeda terrorist who was captured in Pakistan last weekend, was almost caught seven years ago in Qatar, intelligence and law-enforcement officials in Washington and the Persian Gulf say. But as the F.B.I. and C.I.A. closed in on him Qatar officials tipped him off and he got away.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Less than two years later, Mr. Mohammed helped Osama bin Laden devise the strategy of using commercial airliners as missiles. In hindsight, intelligence officials are wondering whether the Sept. 11 attacks might have been averted had he been caught.

HUNT INTENSIFIED -- American and Pakistani intelligence agencies are reported to have stepped up their search for Osama bin Laden, especially in the remote tribal regions along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border. Evidence seized with Mr. Mohammed raised expectations that a breakthrough might be near. But there are no signs that the world's most-wanted terrorist will be caught soon. A Pakistani official was quoted as saying that two sons of Osama bin Laden had been wounded and possibly arrested in southeastern Afghanistan or in the western Pakistani province of Baluchistan. But American and Afghan officials denied the report. Robert D. McFadden
