

A NATION AT WAR: INTERNATIONAL REACTION; Crowds Protest Iraq War In Cities Around World
By Susan Sachs
March 22, 2003

Demonstrations against the American-led war in Iraq roiled cities around the world today, with the riot police in several Arab nations turning water cannons, tear gas, batons and finally bullets on unruly protesters who surged by the thousands into the streets after Friday Prayers.

But the reaction in some countries was more muted than expected.

In Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim country, and across Southeast Asia, rallies against the war drew fewer people than expected. Islamic religious leaders in Indonesia said 100,000 followers would march in Jakarta, but no more than a few thousand, at most, did so.

Angry demonstrations, ranging in size from hundreds to thousands, were held in several Pakistani cities today to protest the attacks on Iraq.

But a call by hard-line Islamic groups for a nationwide strike fizzled and stores generally remained open as normal. The Islamic parties have called for a major demonstration on Sunday in the city of Lahore.

The worst violence was in Yemen, where about 4,000 people tried to march from the ancient city center to the American Embassy on the outskirts of Sana. The embassy building is set back from a highway behind barricades and concrete blocks.

The government said protesters opened fire on the riot police, setting off a gun battle that killed two demonstrators, one of them an 11-year-old boy, and left three police officers hospitalized in critical condition.

At Al Azhar mosque in Cairo, the country's leading cleric, Sheik Muhammad Tantawi, had barely finished his sermon with a prayer for the victory of the Iraqi people, when shouts of ''Save Iraq'' rang out from mass of worshipers.

The riot police beat back protesters trying to leave the mosque, as other demonstrators climbed to a parapet on the building and threw down stones and bits of furniture.

Protesters also scuffled with the police in Jordan, Lebanon and the Palestinian territories.

Even in Bahrain, the tiny Gulf nation that provides the base for the Navy's Fifth Fleet, 300 anti-American demonstrators gathered in front of the fortresslike American Embassy and hurled stones at police officers.

Bush administration officials have talked of a period of reform and modernization for the people of the Middle East once the government of Saddam Hussein is dismantled.

They have suggested that, with the assistance of the United States, a new Iraq will arise from the ruins of Mr. Hussein's despotic rule and stir democratic reform across the region.

But that vision has generally failed to move the Arab public, although dissatisfaction with the autocratic governments of the region is widespread. The United States' motives for the war in Iraq are viewed with suspicion.

Antiwar marchers also filled the streets of many European cities, although generally in smaller numbers than on the first day of American and British strikes on Iraq. Protest leaders across Europe have called for giant demonstrations on Saturday

In Madrid today, several hundred people planted white crosses in a square opposite the Parliament and called for the resignation of José María Aznar, the Spanish prime minister, who has been one of President Bush's strongest supporters on the war. In London, where some analysts said antiwar fervor appeared to lose steam once British forces were engaged in battle, bicyclists protesting the war blocked the square in front of the House of Commons.

While the antiwar sentiment is shared between Europe and the Arab world, its roots appear to be different.

European commentators and politicians tend to criticize the United States and Britain for acting on their own, jeopardizing the credibility of established international institutions and the rule of international law.

In contrast, Arab anger tends to focus on what is seen as American bias in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and on perceived American hypocrisy in backing some repressive Arab governments while going to war to dislodge Mr. Hussein.

The belief is also widespread that America's main interest is to plunder the resources of the Arab world, chiefly oil.

''The political, cultural and social point of reference that America has been, is now eclipsed in the eyes of billions of people,'' Der Tagesspiegel, the Berlin daily, commented today. ''The overwhelming impression: an imperial power is doing what it wants, regardless of its friends and its foes.''

Critics of Prime Minister Tony Blair's support for President Bush argued that Britain's credibility with traditional allies in Europe had been diminished.

''We were never much loved, always recalcitrant bad neighbors, demanding and unpleasant,'' Polly Toynbee wrote in The Guardian today. ''Now we look like the 51st state, and a puny one at that.''
