

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD | FIRST MARINE DIVISION; Constant Iraqi Attacks Are Holding Up the Allied Forces Trying to Reach Baghdad
By John Kifner
March 28, 2003

Marine and other allied units pressing toward Baghdad are encountering nearly constant harassment and ambush by small bands of irregular Iraqi fighters and remnants of army units they bypassed, and officers fear the resistance will only stiffen as they get closer to the capital.

''We've been contested every inch, every mile on the way up,'' Col. Ben Saylor, the division's chief of staff, said today.

Even as he spoke, a separate Marine unit, Task Force Tarawa, was engaged in the fifth day of a pitched battle in the city of Nasiriya, more than 100 miles south of the First Marine Division's forward units.

Hours later, Iraqi fighters spilled out of the town of Samawa, a little north of Nasiriya, and fought American Army troops in an effort to cut supply lines along the main road known as Highway 8.

Asked if the fighting would be more intense as the allied forces neared the Iraqi Republican Guard divisions south of Baghdad, the colonel replied, ''Yeah, I think its going to be.''

The attacks appear to call into question the American strategy of sweeping past Iraqi Army positions and towns in order to reach Baghdad swiftly and, as officers here put it, ''cut off the head'' of the government. They also call into question the Americans' confident belief that they would be welcomed as liberators.

Instead, the Americans could find their supply lines -- convoys of thousands of trucks hauling food, fuel, water and ammunition -- subject to attack. Delay could strengthen efforts by President Saddam Hussein to turn any siege of Baghdad to his political advantage, portraying it as a crisis posing a threat of large civilian casualties.

The planned assault on Baghdad is now about three days behind schedule, officers here say, but the delays were caused less by the ambushes than by the sandstorm that swept in for several days this week, disrupting convoys moving the division, blinding night vision goggles and fouling equipment from pistols to helicopters to computers.

The critical thing, senior Marine officers say, is to maintain the sequence in which American Army troops under the V Corps move forward simultaneously on the west, and British forces advance on the east, protecting each other's flanks.

Colonel Saylor and other intelligence and operations officers here at division headquarters characterized the attackers mainly as members of militias associated with Mr. Hussein and his sons, the fedayeen and Al Quds Brigade along with hard-core Baath Party supporters.

The officers believe that the attackers may be getting rudimentary military direction from Republican Guard officers.

Their weapons are the light equipment common to guerrillas and armies throughout the third world: shoulder-fired rocket-propelled grenades, Soviet-era AK-47 assault rifles and a some small mortars.

But while the marines say they have cut down most of the attackers with overwhelming firepower, they have been impressed in many cases with their tenacity.

''They're showing a lot of guts,'' said Capt. Dave Nettles, an intelligence officer with the Seventh Regimental Combat Team. That Marine unit's light armored reconnaissance patrols have fought several scraps with the guerrillas. ''Maybe they don't have anything to lose.''

In a similar vein, Colonel Saylor added: ''They come, they keep coming. They get up and they come.''

Colonel Saylor and other officers said that they had discovered arms caches along the route and that some of the guerrillas were traveling in Toyota pickup trucks. Most seemed to be operating in civilian clothes. The colonel added that in some towns, ''it's the Baath Party headquarters, that's where they pour out of.''

Lt. Col. Clarke Lethin, an operations officer, said, ''There are battalions stationed throughout the country in order to intimidate. The Baath Party and those people are still in charge.''

Indeed, one reason why the resistance is springing up in the south, behind the advancing American lines, may well be that large units of Baath Party loyalists may have been based there as enforcers, to keep the restive Shiite Muslims in line.

The Americans had expected the Shiite population to rise up against Mr. Hussein's government, but this does not appear to have happened. Another factor may be the long tradition of nationalist and anticolonialist sentiment here dating back at least to the British mandate after World War I.

In addition to the machine guns, rockets and grenade launchers, the Marines are able to call in strikes by Cobra helicopter gunships against the attackers.

''We come back with decisive force and take them down immediately,'' Colonel Saylor said.
