

THREATS AND RESPONSES: CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Hussein Grabs a Top Sweeps-Month Rating in His Network Prime-Time Debut
By Alessandra Stanley
Feb. 28, 2003

Saddam Hussein drew 18 million viewers to CBS on Wednesday night, far outdoing other heatedly promoted interviews with Robert Chambers, ''the Preppy murderer,'' and Robert Blake, the actor and accused wife killer. That alone suggested that Americans are finally focusing on the imminent prospect of war.

Mr. Hussein's eagerness to grant the interview showed that he too suspects the hour is near. But the performance of Dan Rather, the CBS News anchor, received almost as much scrutiny as the demeanor of the defiant leader of Iraq. Some media critics thought he was too soft. Conservatives went so far as to cast doubts on Mr. Rather's patriotism.

The White House was so worried that it lobbied for rebuttal time on CBS News, and when the network declined, put Mr. Bush on the air ahead of Mr. Hussein.

And CBS is still riding out its scoop. Last night the network showed another snippet of the interview, the moment in which Mr. Hussein claims that he was not defeated in the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Its reasons are clear enough: the interview was the highest-rated show in the history of ''60 Minutes II.''

But at the end of it all, viewers learned more about the awkward constraints of television journalism than they did about Mr. Hussein.

The problem with the Hussein interview lay not with CBS News, Mr. Rather or even the onerous ground rules. Television interviews with government leaders, and prickly foreign dictators in particular, are inherently dissatisfying. Newspaper and magazine reporters can write their way around boring boilerplate or their own foolish questions.

Viewers judge a television interview as much by the questions as the answers. When the stakes are as high as they are in Iraq, the tête-à-tête turns even more portentous. Many viewers expect a reckoning -- a chance to hear their champion confront the subject with all the charges weighing on their minds.

Mr. Hussein, of course, had his own, far simpler agenda. The Iraqi leader, whom Mr. Bush described as an ''evildoer,'' holds a satanic place in American public opinion, so merely by not reaching across the desk and grabbing Mr. Rather by the throat he achieved his main goal.

Mr. Rather wanted to make news and also look balanced and professional. To his credit, perhaps, he did not showboat -- he did not upbraid Mr. Hussein in mid-denial, like an avenging Dr. Phil. But audiences have been conditioned by the take-no-prisoners tactics of television interviewers like Bill O'Reilly on Fox News. They are also used to seeing Mr. Rather let his emotions run free.

Viewers did not hear Mr. Rather challenge his host with potent phrases like ''poison gas,'' ''tortured dissidents,'' or''bioterrorist attack,'' phrases that have punctuated the public discourse for months.

Some of those charges were raised instead in commentaries Mr. Rather sprinkled throughout the show.

Perhaps in response to some of the criticism, CBS News tonight showed a clip of Mr. Rather getting a bit tougher with his host.

Mr. Rather pointed out that Americans who saw Iraqi tanks rolling out of Kuwait in 1991 might not believe Mr. Hussein's claim that he did not lose the war. ''Respectfully,'' Mr. Rather said to Mr. Hussein, American viewers ''might be asking themselves, 'What is this man talking about?' ''

On ''60 Minutes II,'' Mr. Rather pressed Mr. Hussein about the Al Samoud 2 missiles he has said he will not destroy. The anchor asked the Iraqi about Sept 11, and his relationship with Osama bin Laden, the one question that evinced an idiosyncratic reply: Mr. Hussein insisted he was not jealous of Mr. bin Laden's popularity on the Arab street. ''Jealousy is for women, and men are not supposed to be jealous of each other.''

CBS News producers explained that Mr. Rather asked all the pertinent questions in an interview that was partly conducted off camera. That's good journalism, but it's not great television.

Mr. Rather, 71, has mellowed over the years, but he is still known as the reporter whose live interview with the first President Bush about Iran-contra during the 1988 presidential campaign got so testy both men seemed on verge of blows.

Mr. Rather is a respected journalist. He is also much more than a news anchor -- he is a legendary television personality. In his interview with Saddam Hussein, he tried to hunch down and resume his favorite role: reporter. But the get was bigger than that, and Mr. Rather seemed a little smaller as a result.
