

A NATION AT WAR: IN THE FIELD/IRAQI WATERWAY; Odd Vessel Serving Allies As Truck Stop That Floats
By James Dao
March 29, 2003

Navy commandos have been inching their way into Iraq with the help of an odd-looking ship, which just three years ago was ferrying commuters and their cars around New Zealand.

The HSV-X1 Joint Venture, a 315-foot-long, aluminum-hull catamaran that has been modified to carry gunboats, amphibious landing craft, helicopters and marine platoons, has become a seaborne forward operating base for Navy special operations forces, which are helping to clear southern Iraqi waterways of Iraqi ships and mines. ''We are the mother ship,'' said Capt. Phil Beierl, the Joint Venture's commander.

The fast twin-hull ship has been anchored in Kuwaiti waters within sight of Iraq's lone deep-water port, Umm Qasr. Like a floating truck stop, the Joint Venture has provided supplies, shelter and spare parts for more than a dozen Naval Special Warfare boats that have been darting in and out of the Khawr Az Zubayr, the waterway that links Umm Qasr to the Tigris River to the north and the Persian Gulf to the south.

For several days, the small, speedy special operations boats have been searching Iraqi vessels for mines, snipers and fleeing soldiers. Sea-Air-Land units, called Seals, have combed through the many derelict freighters in the river to make sure, they are not booby trapped. And the boats have been carrying Seal teams into Iraqi territory on reconnaissance missions.

The work of these small-boat units and commandos was critical to securing the port so that a British cargo ship, the Sir Galahad, could begin bringing food, water and medicine for Iraqi civilians into Umm Qasr's container port.

Without the Joint Venture, the small commando boats would have had to travel scores of miles to reach bases in Kuwait for fuel and supplies, adding as many as four days to the operation, Naval Special Warfare planners said.

''It would have been a mess,'' said Captain Snyder, who is in charge of logistics for the Naval Special Warfare Task Group based in Kuwait. Like most of the Naval Special Warfare officers interviewed, he asked that his first name not be used.

But with the Joint Venture nearby, the Seal and commando teams were just minutes from fuel, hot meals, ammunition, showers, warm bunks, Internet access and a video-stocked television room. And when hurricane-force winds damaged an MK-V gunboat on the Khawr Az Zubayr early Wednesday, the ship was able to limp back to the Joint Venture.

Lt. Cmdr. Tom Rancich, who is in charge of future operations for the Naval Special Warfare Task Group, said that the Joint Venture's support capabilities were invaluable. ''We've never had 14 small boats operating independently of the big Navy for seven days, unresupplied,'' he said.

Navy planners had already been searching for a fast, maneuverable cargo vessel capable of operating in coastal waters when they first observed Australian forces using a commercial catamaran to ferry peacekeeping troops to East Timor, Indonesia, in 1999.

Impressed, the Pentagon leased two of the $48-million catamarans in July 2001 for about $5 million a year each from Bollinger/Incat USA, an Australian-based company. Initially, the ships were viewed as experimental. But they were pressed into war duty in January, and 40-member crews were hastily assembled.

With its four jet-propulsion engines, the Joint Venture can travel 3,000 nautical miles at 35 knots without refueling. It carries enough extra fuel to keep several smaller boats operating for days, has room on its car deck for as many as six small boats and can carry more than 200 soldiers or other passengers. It also has a helicopter landing pad.

Because it rides high in the water, it can also navigate relatively shallow waters. That was essential for the current mission because the Navy did not want to expose the Joint Venture to the heavily fortified coast of the Fao Peninsula in Iraq.

Instead, the ship detoured close to the Kuwaiti coast, weaving through narrow waters, creeping over a sand bar at high tide and slipping under a bridge at low tide. ''Normally, you wouldn't take a sail boat up that channel,'' Commander Wilson, a Seal commander said aboard the vessel.

There have been some problems. The ship cannot purify enough sea water to meet demand, so showers have been curtailed. The car deck cannot handle tanks, and the helicopter pad cannot be used at night.

But a new catamaran under construction for the Pentagon, scheduled for delivery in July, will be modified to overcome those shortcomings.
