
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING; P.R. firms alter their tone and worry about coverage as most eyes are on Iraq.
By Nat Ives
April 1, 2003

PUBLIC relations professionals, confronted by the war's dominance in the news, are overhauling their strategies to spread their clients' messages.

For many, that has meant canceling long-planned events, scaling back publicity blitzes or giving up on regular news coverage for now. Instead, the emphasis is on employee communications, investor relations and other tools that are not dependent on reporters.

The Hallmark Channel, for example, canceled a theme party last week to promote its rebroadcast of ''The Thorn Birds'' mini-series. The United Parcel Service scaled back promotion of its new logo last week. And the Treasury Department has delayed a preview of its color-changed $20 bills.

''P.R. consultants certainly are being more called on to find the strategies that will reach a very targeted audience rather than doing a very broad-strokes campaign to reach a mass of people,'' said Julia Hood, editor in chief at PR Week in New York.

Pam Slay, vice president for network program publicity at the Hallmark Channel in Studio City, Calif., part of Crown Media Holdings, said, ''The challenge for public relations people is to balance what they're trying to promote against a very, very serious and dangerous world situation.''

Hallmark had planned to reunite nearly all the surviving cast members of ''The Thorn Birds'' for its party, during which 150 celebrities and hundreds of reporters were to have mingled on a re-creation of a set from the show on a Warner Brothers back lot. ''We realized that in the midst of all the frivolity we had planned that there would be troops deployed and the potential for the loss of life,'' Ms. Slay said.

Not only would the message have been inappropriate, but press coverage could have evaporated as news outlets devoted themselves to the war beat, she said. The broadcast began on schedule Sunday night, backed by more modest publicity, including an appearance by one star on ABC's ''The View.''

United Parcel went ahead last Tuesday with television and newspaper advertising that promoted several marketing initiatives, but did so with restraint.

''We made the decision to scale back some public, press-type events to make it much more of an internal announcement,'' said John Beystehner, senior vice president for worldwide sales and marketing at United Parcel in Atlanta.

''The original ceremony was going to be outside,'' said Michael Schiferl, senior vice president and director for the media service practice at the Chicago office of Edelman, which has United Parcel as a client. But gathering a large crowd outdoors might have looked too celebratory or caused some employees to feel at risk, he said.

The business press noted the company's new logo, the first redesign in more than four decades, but did not cover it with the gusto that might have come in peacetime.

Instead of using glamour events to earn attention from the major news media, public relations professionals are increasingly turning to specific messages aimed at the local and trade media as well as investors and employees.

Weber Shandwick, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, has prepared messages and information for customers of the agency's travel and hospitality clients, even recruiting counselors for nervous hotel guests, said Jack Leslie, chairman.

Reed Bolton Byrum, president and chief executive at the Public Relations Society of America in New York: ''There's a lot more to public relations than media relations. This is the full spectrum from investor relations to employee communications to strategic planning and platforming of an organization.''

When a media opportunity does emerge, it is important to treat the situation with delicacy, Mr. Byrum said.

For example, some public relations agencies have offered up client executives as experts on the war's effect on a given business sector. When making such offers, an effort should be made to find the strongest possible expert to avoid an appearance of exploiting the conflict, he said. ''At the public relations society,'' Mr. Byrum said, ''we really stress ethical communications. This is a really good time for ethical communications.''

Simply waiting for an end to the war, much less a return to the calm of a day like Sept. 10, 2001, is not an option for many marketers.

''Life goes on, as to quarterly numbers and as to any substantial personnel changes,'' said Richard Edelman, president and chief executive at Edelman in New York, which is part of Daniel J. Edelman. ''The perception is that this is not a one-week interruption in business. This is maybe two months, or maybe some sort of permanent condition.''
