
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Several Nations Weigh U.S. Request to Join Forces Against Iraq
By James Dao
Nov. 21, 2002

The governments of Britain, Australia, Denmark and several other nations said today that they were strongly considering formal requests from the United States to join a military coalition against Iraq, if weapons inspections fail.

The countries are among more than 50 nations that American diplomats have been contacting this week in foreign capitals and at the NATO summit meeting in Prague to discuss participating either in an invasion or postwar reconstruction effort in Iraq, administration officials said.

While the United States is asking some nations to provide troops and military equipment for a war, it is asking others for support in peacekeeping, relief and reconstruction operations after a war.

American and foreign officials said today that the discussions with most nations were still in the early stages and that few, if any, governments had committed troops or other resources.

The preparations for war had two objectives, officials said: to pressure President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to comply with weapons inspections, and to have a force in place for quick action in case Iraq violates the United Nation resolution requiring its disarmament.

''In dealing with Iraq, it's clear that only the credible threat of force and serious consequences are likely to elicit Iraqi cooperation and compliance,'' said Philip T. Reeker, the deputy State Department spokesman. ''In that vein, we're engaged in discussions with a large number of like-minded governments around the world about what may need to be done if Iraq does not comply with the Security Council resolution. And this includes participation in and support for a future coalition.''

But the United States also has a political objective in recruiting partners for a possible military strike: to demonstrate that it is not acting unilaterally against Iraq.

The participation, even nominal, of other countries in a military ''coalition of the willing,'' as the White House has called it, would be particularly important to the administration if the United States chose to attack Iraq without authorization from the United Nations Security Council, officials said.

The American diplomatic effort began on Monday when the State Department sent cables to more than 50 United States Embassies asking them to open formal discussions with their host governments about joining a coalition against Iraq.

The effort continued today in Prague, where President Bush discussed Iraq with President Ahmet Necdet Sezer of Turkey and President Vaclav Havel of the Czech Republic. Mr. Bush is scheduled to meet with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and President Jacques Chirac of France in Prague on Thursday, before traveling to Russia.

Geoff Hoon, the British secretary of state for defense, said today that Parliament had scheduled a debate for Monday on the American request for military assistance against Iraq. Britain has consistently been the United States' closest partner in the war on terrorism, and British troops would probably play a major role in an American-led coalition.

''What is important is that we are prepared, that we maintain that preparation, that we are there to underpin if necessary the U.N. Security Council process, and that continues to be the case,'' Mr. Hoon told reporters.

In Sydney, Australia's prime minister, John Howard, said today that Australia had participated with the United States Central Command, which oversees American forces in the Middle East, in planning for a possible military strike against Iraq. Australian officials also said that Australia planned to withdraw 150 special forces commandoes from Afghanistan, where they have helped hunt for Qaeda and Taliban forces, for possible redeployment to Iraq.

''During these discussions, it has been made clear that any Australian contribution in a new theater such as Iraq would need to be within our resources and not detract from immediate defense and national security needs,'' Mr. Howard said.

French, Canadian and Dutch officials said their governments had also received requests for assistance from the United States. It was not clear tonight whether Germany would be asked to participate.

Pentagon officials said there have also been discussions and some informal agreements with some Persian Gulf countries about using their bases as staging areas for troops and aircraft.

The long-running, low-level war in the no-flight zones of Iraq continued today when American and British aircraft struck Iraqi air defense communications facilities after allied planes came under fire from surface-to-air missiles and antiaircraft artillery, Pentagon officials said.

Allied warplanes bombed three targets between Al Kut, about 100 miles southeast of Baghdad, and Basra, about 245 miles southeast of the Iraqi capital, officials said.
