

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DISCORD; France to Veto Resolution On Iraq War, Chirac Says
By Elaine Sciolino
March 11, 2003

In a dramatic break with the United States, President Jacques Chirac said tonight that France would veto a United Nations resolution threatening war against Iraq.

''My position is that whatever the circumstances, France will vote no,'' Mr. Chirac said. He added that he had ''the feeling'' that Russia and China, which also have veto power in the Security Council, are prepared to follow France's lead.

Speaking calmly and deliberately during a live television interview in Élysée Palace this evening, Mr. Chirac said he was convinced that the United Nations inspections process was working and that Iraq could be stripped of its dangerous weapons without war.

''The inspectors say that cooperation has improved and that they are in a position to pursue their work,'' Mr. Chirac said. ''This is what is essential. It's not up to you or me to say if the inspections are working.''

He added, ''We refuse to follow a path that will lead automatically to war as long as the inspectors don't say to us, 'We can't go any further.' ''

For the United States to wage war without the assent of the international community would set ''a dangerous precedent,'' Mr. Chirac warned.

Mr. Chirac offered Washington a way out, crediting the American military buildup in the Persian Gulf region and the threat of force for forcing the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, to disarm.

''They have deployed 200,000 troops; they have already won,'' Mr. Chirac exclaimed. ''I have had the chance to tell this already to President Bush.''

Washington is not likely to see it that way. To Mr. Bush, the inspections process can never succeed in disarming Iraq. Only the overthrow of Mr. Hussein will do that.

To Mr. Chirac, American military pressure has allowed the inspectors to succeed in the process of disarming Iraq, and their request last week for more time to continue their work must be respected.

Indeed, Mr. Chirac acknowledged that Mr. Hussein needed to cooperate more with inspectors searching for his weapons of mass destruction. ''It's not for you or me to say whether the inspections are effective, if Iraq is sufficiently cooperative -- it is not, by the way, I'll tell you that right away,'' he said.

Mr. Chirac seemed impervious to the warning by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell on American television on Sunday that a French veto would seriously harm bilateral relations. ''I am totally convinced of the opposite,'' he said, adding at another point that France is ''not at all in conflict with the United States.''

He dismissed threats of an American-led economic embargo against France -- which has been proposed by a number of American lawmakers -- saying that in an age of globalization, such actions no longer make sense.

Mr. Chirac sat behind a long, delicate desk opposite the two interviewers from the TF1 and France 2 television channels and fiddled with a blue pen throughout the 35-minute interview.

If the United States brings the resolution to a vote, as it has promised, and France vetoes it, it would be the first time France voted against the United States since the 1956 Suez crisis.

However, Mr. Chirac also indicated that France might not have to use its veto power because, he said, the resolution did not have the necessary nine votes for passage.

Mr. Chirac spoke on a day of furious global diplomacy, as President Bush and Mr. Powell worked the phones to build foreign support for the pending, American-drafted resolution that would authorize war if Baghdad fails to surrender all its weapons of mass destruction by March 17.

Meanwhile, the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, traveled to three African countries that currently sit on the Security Council -- Angola, Cameroon and Guinea -- in the hope of persuading them to oppose the war resolution. Mr. de Villepin has said repeatedly that a vast majority of the world is against the war, and would like to prove that point by winning the vote in the United Nations.

However, Mr. de Villepin today failed to secure backing for the French position during a brief stop in Angola. Foreign Minister João Bernardo de Miranda said that war on Iraq now seemed inevitable, and hinted that Angola would abstain. ''The position of Angola is to back neither France nor the United States,'' Mr. Bernardo de Miranda said.

In Cameroon, the foreign minister, François-Xavier Ngoubeyou, refused to comment on how his country would vote.
