

A NATION CHALLENGED: DIPLOMACY; In Visit to U.S., Kuwaitis Support Action on Iraq
By Judith Miller
Feb. 3, 2002

A group of prominent Kuwaitis visiting the United States has delivered an unusual message of support for American policy and values.

The delegation of 11 Kuwaiti parliamentarians, human rights activists, former officials and academics closed out a weeklong trip to Washington and New York on Friday with a meeting at the Council on Foreign Relations and a visit to ground zero. They said that President Bush's victory in Afghanistan had helped give them the courage to challenge Islamic fundamentalists in their own country.

Muhammad Jassem al-Saqer, a former publisher and now chairman of the Kuwaiti Parliament's foreign affairs committee, applauded President Bush's vow to act against Iraq, Iran and North Korea for developing weapons of mass destruction. He called Iraq ''the richest and most dangerous state in the region'' and said his conversations with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz and other senior officials in Washington had convinced him that President Bush was determined to act against Saddam Hussein.

''The clock is ticking,'' Mr. Saqer said. ''The later you move, the more dangerous he becomes.''

Ahmad E. Bishara, an engineer and a co-founder of a liberal political party, urged the United States to stand by Arab individuals and groups that favor democracy, secularism and enhanced human rights. The September attacks, he said, were a ''defining moment'' for the Arabs in that they ''set the stage for diverse, vibrant discussion'' and intellectual confrontation between Islamic fundamentalists and ''the majority of Arabs who stand for human rights.''

''You've got to stay and get engaged with us,'' said Faisal al-Mutawa, a prominent businessman and another co-founder with Mr. Bishara of the liberal National Democratic Movement. ''We want to privatize Islam rather than make it part of the purview of the state. Religion is between everyone and his God.''

Islamic militants in Kuwait and elsewhere in Arab countries, he said, were trying to ''re-engineer Islam to suit their own objectives.''

Education, he added, badly needed reform, and Arab schools did not graduate students with skills that modern economies require: ''These students are unemployable because all they know is a few verses of the Koran.''

Fouad Ajami, a professor of Middle Eastern studies at Johns Hopkins University who moderated the panel's discussion, said in an interview that the delegation's visit and its open identification with American policy showed that Washington's victory over the Taliban in Afghanistan ''has emboldened liberals and secularists.''

He added: ''It has given them the nerve and the self-confidence to try to retrieve the ground they have lost to the Islamists and extremists over the last decade.''

That boldness was evident in the Kuwaitis' call for action against Iraq. It was also evident in Mr. Saqer's endorsement of a ''secure Israeli state next to a viable Palestinian state.'' Mr. Bishara said America's message was not ''getting through'' to the Arabs because American officials still preferred talking to Arab governments rather than directly to their citizens. ''Don't talk to the regimes, but to the Muslim people,'' he suggested.

Professor Ajami said the United States government was ''understandably suspicious'' of Arab civil society since many media outlets, private associations, and other nongovernment institutions had been taken over by Islamic militants hostile to American policy and values.

Dr. Saad bin Tifla al-Ajmi, a former Kuwait minister of information and now a lecturer at the University of Kuwait, accused Arab governments of fomenting a ''culture of terrorism'' by having abdicated mosques and charitable institutions to the Islamists.

Those institutions had to be reclaimed, Mr. Bishara said, however unpopular that would be.

Islamists in the Kuwaiti Parliament had denounced the delegation's visit and accused the Kuwaiti government of encouraging the trip. But Lulwah Saleh al-Mulla, secretary general of the Women's Social and Cultural Society, said that the delegates had paid their own way and that they had decided themselves last fall to make the trip.

''We came out of love,'' she said, ''and to express our gratitude to the United States for having liberated us'' in the 1991 Persian Gulf war against Saddam Hussein.

Because of that searing experience, many Kuwaitis have greater respect for America than do other Arabs in the Gulf and Arab states. Even so, the Kuwaitis said, America needed to do more to show that it would remain engaged in the battle for human rights and dignity. In 1991 in Iraq, as one of them put it, ''you came, you bombed and you left.''
