

MIDEAST TURMOIL: OIL; Iraq Halts Petroleum Exports To Put Pressure on Americans
By Neil MacFarquhar
April 9, 2002

President Saddam Hussein of Iraq halted his country's oil exports temporarily today, saying he would seek to damage the American economy because of Washington's support for Israel, and he repeated his demand -- likely to remain ignored -- that other Middle Eastern oil producers follow suit.

Shutting off the taps had an immediate impact on oil prices, which shot upward. But it seems unlikely that the move will have any short-term effect on the United Nations program that supervises Iraq's purchase of food, medicine and other goods by siphoning its oil revenue through a special account.

Mr. Hussein said Iraq would review the decision to halt exports after a month, or after the Israeli military withdrew unconditionally from Palestinian territory.

''This decision is essentially aimed against the Zionist entity and the aggressive U.S. policy, not against anyone else,'' Mr. Hussein said, accusing the United States of backing Israel's sustained military offensive.

The move would clearly be popular among the general Arab population, with demonstrators joining ever larger marches all week, chanting for their leaders to skip the speeches and take some action.

King Abdullah II of Jordan, in his first brief public remarks on the situation, said today that if Israel did not withdraw from the Palestinian territories immediately, relations with his kingdom would be affected. But he did not specify how.

Mr. Hussein said other countries should follow Iraq's example.

''Our Arab and Muslim brethren and all believers will hopefully encourage our move,'' he said in a televised address, suggesting that all oil exporters take ''similar measures.''

Despite the day's steep rise in prices after the announcement, oil analysts said other producers like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, often fearful of the effect of volatile oil prices, were likely to increase production to make up the shortfall. Nations outside the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries, like Russia and Norway, can be expected to increase sales to take advantage of high prices.

Iraq exports about two million barrels of oil a day, or 4 percent of global production. The United States in particular ranks among its best customers. The Iraqis say roughly 15 percent of America's imported oil originates in Iraq. The United States says the figure is more like 8 percent.

Mr. Hussein's measure ''will have a major impact on the oil market and directly hurt the U.S. economy,'' Oil Minister Amir Muhammad Rashid told Iraq's satellite television channel.

He said the United States generally bought 1.25 million barrels of oil daily that originated in Iraq and noted that he had contacted other members of OPEC to suggest that they not mitigate the effect of the embargo by raising their production.

Although the leaders of Iran and Libya have supported the idea of reviving the 1973 Arab oil embargo, which resulted in Americans lining up for gasoline, they seem unlikely to join. Iran's economic problems make it heavily dependent on oil revenue -- as is the case with most oil producers -- and Libya only recently began resuming commercial ties with the West.

Although Mr. Hussein has forced the 17 million Iraqi people to weather repeated crises in the past, United Nations officials said the export cutoff probably would not have any immediate effect on the oil-for-food program.

Some $13 billion in outstanding contracts for food, medicine and other supplies is already in the pipeline, said Hasmik Egian, the spokeswoman for the program. But the program has already been suffering from a funding crisis, with no money to back another $2 billion in contracts that have already been approved.

''There is a funding shortfall, so this will further complicate that situation,'' Ms. Egian said.

She said that Iraq earned some $11 billion from oil last year, but that production was already erratic because the Iraqis stopped exports in June and then slowed them again in December in a dispute with the United Nations over pricing. More stringent price controls were put in place after reports that Iraq was demanding kickbacks from buyers that were deposited outside the United Nations system.

Iraq exports smaller volumes of oil to its neighbors -- Jordan, Syria and Turkey -- with various levels of United Nations approval. While Jordan's economic hardships exempted it from some United Nations controls, the United Nations has queried Syria about opening a long-closed pipeline to help Iraq export. Baghdad did not indicate that any of those sales would be cut.
