

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MILITANTS; Europeans Warn of Terror Attacks in Event of War in Iraq
By Marlise Simons
Jan. 29, 2003

European investigators have evidence that over the past six months, Islamic militants have been recruiting hundreds of fellow Muslims to carry out attacks in the event of a war against Iraq, according to French and other European antiterrorism experts.

A French expert, who requested anonymity, said one threat to Europe came from radical groups who have links with Chechnya and have learned how to make chemical weapons, either at training camps in Afghanistan or while serving in the Soviet Army. He said Chechnya was now a kind of ''neo-Afghanistan,'' a new training ground and staging area for anti-Western terrorists.

What was just a working thesis a few months ago, he said, has been validated by new information about intense recruiting, training and a focus on chemical weapons. In both Spain and Britain, the police reported finding chemical protection suits during raids last week in Barcelona and London.

In France, the police prevented ''serious attacks'' in Paris in December, probably including attacks using chemical weapons, the French expert said.


Western Europe is home to about 15 million Muslim immigrants and while a vast majority are peaceful citizens opposed to terrorism, their presence provides a recruiting ground and a cover for sleeper cells.

Investigators said links between bases in Chechnya and cells in Europe had been known for some time. In recent days, some of the links have been publicized.

Last week, the Spanish police arrested 16 suspects, many of them Algerians, who they said had links to Chechnya, as well as radical Islamic cells in France and Britain. The police said the suspects were found with explosives and chemicals.

Fears of terrorist actions against European cities in case of war against Iraq are a concern throughout Western Europe, diplomats said.

On Monday, the Italian interior minister, Giuseppe Pisanu, told Parliament in Rome that terrorism is a major and growing threat in Italy, and added, ''The internal and international terrorist threat would be even more worrying if there were a war in Iraq.''

The Italian police last week arrested five Moroccans found near Venice with plastic explosives and a detailed map of London.

In France, the antiterrorism expert said terrorist attacks in European capitals would be ''a price we may have to pay'' if war breaks out.

''We have evidence of a great deal of recruitment'' by radical Islamic groups that would seek to take advantage of a war situation to sow mayhem, he said.

Police and intelligence officials in Germany and the Czech Republic have talked in recent days of suspected terrorists trained in Afghanistan heading to Europe.

France's most experienced anti-terrorism judge, Jean-Louis Bruguière, has described the struggle with Al Qaeda and its supporters in a recent article as ''the Hundred Years War of modern times.'' Intelligence agencies, he said in La Revue Politique, had to deal with a globalized and nihilistic force that ''is everywhere and nowhere'' and dedicated to the destruction of Western societies. The absence of obvious leaders made it impossible to deal with the movement, he said, or to have any prospect of a political settlement.

European investigators said that the shadowy new groups that have moved into Europe, many of them made up of North Africans from Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia, were well instructed on how to flit from country to country in the border-free European Union, and that they mostly financed themselves -- to the tune of $10,000 to $15,000 a week -- through common criminal activities like credit card fraud, making it difficult to follow a money trail.

European intelligence agencies have concentrated on the large Islamic populations living in the midst of cities, but the French antiterrorism expert said it was increasingly evident that a new threat now comes from the Caucasus. Among those who are shadowed by the police or who have been recently arrested, the French expert said, are men with skills in engineering, electronics and computing.

Four people were arrested in Paris in late December in a suspected plot to carry out attacks, and Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy said the suspects were thought to have been trained in Chechnya.

''I think we are facing a new menace, a new Afghanistan, and that is Chechnya,'' the French expert said, adding that this would require more Western cooperation with Moscow.

''Chechnya is just three hours away,'' he said. ''This is not just a Russian problem. It is going to be more global.''
