

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE MILITARY; Rumsfeld Orders 35,000 More Troops Deployed Near Iraq
By Thom Shanker
Jan. 11, 2003

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld signed a mammoth deployment order today sending about 35,000 new troops, half of them marines, to the Persian Gulf region, Pentagon and military officials said.

The detailed order, described as several dozen pages long, involved the largest number of military personnel yet as the Pentagon masses troops, warships and aircraft around Iraq to pressure President Saddam Hussein to disarm -- and to prepare for attack, should President Bush order the nation to war.

By including about 17,500 marines, the order sends a significant number of the military's mobile and hard-hitting ground troops -- who travel with their own attack planes and helicopters -- toward Iraq. The order also includes pilots, mechanics and additional warplanes, combat engineers, logistics support and loading crews, senior officials said.

For the marines, the deployment order includes two amphibious task forces, parts of a marine division, support personnel and a number of attack planes and helicopters, officials said.

Army combat personnel are also deployed in the order, including air defense units, two aviation companies of combat and support helicopters, and medical personnel, civil affairs officers and engineers.

The order signed today by Mr. Rumsfeld covered more personnel than one he approved just before Christmas, which deployed 20,000 to 25,000 people, including the Army's Third Infantry Division.

Senior officials said today that when troops covered by these two deployment orders were combined with military personnel already in the region, the Pentagon would have a land, naval and air force of more than 100,000 people by the end of this month.

At Camp Pendleton, Calif., home of the First Marine Expeditionary Force, a spokesman said late today that they had not yet received official notification of a deployment order. But officials there said convoys of military vehicles were already moving toward the San Diego port today.

''This is a repositioning of our marine expeditionary forces,'' a spokesman said. ''It is to give maximum flexibility to the marines.''

On the opposite coast, a spokesman at Camp Lejeune, N.C., home of the Second Marine Expeditionary Force, said about 7,000 marines there had received authorization to embark on Navy ships. The spokesman said the marines were already gathering personal gear and preparing to board ships in anticipation of orders to sail toward the Persian Gulf region.

Gen. James L. Jones, who is leaving his post as Marine Corps commandant to become commander of all American forces in Europe, said earlier this week that 65,000 to 75,000 marines would be involved in any military action against Iraq.

''Now, in this latest buildup, it is still the First Marine Expeditionary Force led by a lieutenant general that would provide the bulk of the Marine Corps' contribution to that effort,'' General Jones said during a luncheon speech at the National Press Club.

''But that force would also be augmented from elements of the Second Marine Expeditionary Force to make sure that it's rounded out and we have the right-size unit,'' he added. ''But in aggregate numbers, it's somewhere around 65,000 to 75,000 marines is what we're looking at, if you really are thinking about what are the numbers. For our contribution, that's about what it would be.''

Although the deployment order was signed today, it could be days before the individual units are notified and even longer before their departure. The deployment order is Mr. Rumsfeld's official approval of requests from Gen. Tommy Franks, in charge of all American military operations in the Persian Gulf region.

As a practical matter, the deployment order moves from Mr. Rumsfeld's desk to the Joint Force Command, in Norfolk, Va., where General Franks's requirements are matched to the capabilities of specific units, which are then notified.

Pentagon and military officials have said that, should President Bush order an attack on Iraq, a force of about 250,000 would be needed.

But the initial assault could begin with a substantially smaller force, with the rest held in reserve in case of battlefield surprise or setbacks, or as a stabilization force once the war was over.

A number of other deployments were announced in recent days, including a pair of B-1 bombers that flew from Ellsworth Air Force Base, S.D.

Three Navy ships received new orders, officials said. The Ponce, an amphibious transport dock ship, and two amphibious assault ships, the Saipan and the Gunston Hall, sailed from Norfolk today.

