

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PROTESTS; Candlelight Vigils Are Held Around the World to Oppose Military Action Against Iraq
By Thomas J. Lueck
March 17, 2003

Thousands of candlelight vigils were held last night in public squares, houses of worship and living rooms around the world in subdued and widespread protests against military action against Iraq..

The vigils, like hundreds of more boistrous antiwar protests in recent weeks, were organized largely over the Internet. By the time dozens of the gatherings were set to begin at 7 p.m. in the New York City region, a Web site set up by organizers to provide international coordination of the vigils (www.globalvigil.org) said 6,668 were to take place in 139 nations.

''Beginning in New Zealand, this will be a rolling wave of candlelight gatherings that will quickly cross the globe,'' said the Web site, established by several advocacy groups with endorsements from Archbishop Desmond Tutu and other members of the clergy.

The vigils were conceived as a form of protest that would contrast with antiwar marches and demonstrations in which tens of thousands of people have chanted, carried placards, listened to impassioned speakers and, in some cases, clashed with the police in several United States cities.

More than 50 of the vigils were planned last night in New York City alone, at sites ranging from Strawberry Fields in Central Park to apartment building rooftops in Brooklyn and a site outside an Army recruiting station in the Bronx.

''I have had mixed feelings, but recently I have begun thinking the administration is being imperialistic,'' said Amanda Lewis, 22, a Manhattan legal assistant, who was among about 1,000 people attending a vigil that filled the south end of Union Square.

''The administration hasn't paid a lot of attention to what people want,'' she said. ''I'd like to see all diplomatic avenues exhausted before we go to war.''

Like many others, the vigil at Union Square was staged without speeches or scheduled events. Most who attended arrived with candles, lighted them in silent protest and gathered in small groups, some singing spirituals or folk songs quietly. By 9 p.m., an hour after the vigil was to end, about 200 of the protesters continued to mill about.

''I am here because people need to take a public stand,'' said Pat DeAngelis, 64, of the East Village. ''We are in a moment of crisis, and people in the United States don't seem to understand what this war would mean for us.''

Although attendance at the thousands of vigils planned around the world could not be immediately verified last night, the organizers' Web site listed gatherings that were to take place in settings that ranged from the front of Westminster Cathedral in London to a roadside in front of the Mahatma Gandhi Statue in Bangalore.

There was a vigil scheduled in Riyadh and another at the South Pole.

In the United States, vigils were planned in every large urban area and many small towns.

In Washington, D.C., several thousand people created a sea of candlelight around the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, where faith-based orators criticized the nation's military buildup and Peter, Paul and Mary performed.

''This wasn't about shouting,'' said Beth Slepian, a Washington resident who attended the vigil, and whose father, a member of the Army Reserve Medical Corps, is stationed in Kuwait. ''This was spiritual.''

A few hundred of the Washington protesters walked from the Lincoln Memorial with their candles to the White House, where they sang folk songs.

''We are trying another method of being heard,'' said Rhonda Combs, of Baltimore, who walked with the protesters to the White House. She said she had attended other antiwar protests recently, and described the one last night as ''a lot more main stream.''

In Chicago, where several thousand protesters earlier yesterday crammed Daley Plaza to hoist American flags and placards with strident criticism of President Bush, a candlelight vigil attracted about 350 people near the Water Tower on Michigan Avenue.

''My country does not represent me if we go to war,'' said Gerry Newton, 61, a lawyer who was among a small cluster of women at the center of the Chicago gathering who sang the folk song ''Where Have All the Flowers Gone'' quietly until dozens of others joined in full voiced rendition.

''The reasons for war are not good,'' said Angie Gusman, a 19-year-old student at the Chicago vigil. ''I don't think President Bush really cares, but I think this will give him some sort of message.''





