

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD'S ARSENAL; Weapons Development Called Iraq's Priority
By Warren Hoge
Sept. 10, 2002

Iraq has sizable stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons and could quickly expand their production, but will be unable to build a nuclear weapon for years unless it obtains radioactive material on the black market, a leading research organization said today.

The group, the International Institute for Strategic Studies, which is based in London, said that while many doubts remained about the quantities of Saddam Hussein's war matériel and its capacities, there was no question that his government's priority was developing weapons of mass destruction.

''War, sanctions and inspections have reversed and retarded but not eliminated Iraq's nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and long-range missile capacity, nor removed Baghdad's enduring interest in developing these capabilities,'' John Chipman, the institute director, said at a news conference.

''The retention of weapons of mass destruction capacities by Iraq is self-evidently the core objective of the regime. Sooner or later, it seems that the current Iraqi regime will eventually achieve its aims.''

While the report explicitly took no sides in the current debate over the urgency of blocking Mr. Hussein's ambitions, Gary Samore, the author, said the argument for taking action now was stronger than it was before the Persian Gulf war because Mr. Hussein had proved over the 11 years since that he would not respond to political and military pressure.

Mr. Chipman noted that both approaches under discussion held risks. ''Wait, and the threat will grow,'' he said. ''Strike, and the threat may be used.''

Mr. Chipman cast doubt on the ability of inspectors to make quick determinations of what weapons of mass destruction Iraq now holds unless they develop ''an imaginative and carefully coordinated counter-concealment strategy.''

The report said United Nations inspectors would need an unspecified period of time to develop and refine their techniques and accumulate the ''necessary tradecraft to deal with Iraqi obfuscation efforts.''

While today's report put forward no arresting new conclusions, it was praised by experts for its thoroughness and immediately fueled comment in the intensifying debate over Iraq.

Sources for the report include government documents, the testimony of Iraqi defectors, interviews with former inspectors and technical experts to digest all this material.

A spokesman for Prime Minister Tony Blair, a vocal proponent of swift action, said the report painted a picture of ''a highly unstable regime, with access to biological and chemical weapons.'' He suggested that a dossier on the Iraqi weapons buildup to be issued later this month by Mr. Blair would be even starker because it would have access to classified intelligence.

Menzies Campbell, a Liberal Democrat who opposes attacking Iraq, dismissed the report, saying it contained ''nothing startling, nor anything that could not have been inferred from Iraq's previous behavior.'' Paul Beaver of Jane's Defense Weekly, said: ''This report is a very good document, the best compilation of the facts I have seen. But there's nothing new here, no killer fact that makes me believe that we should go to war tomorrow.''

The report said Iraq had probably retained substantial amounts of biological warfare agents from pre-gulf-war stocks undetected by inspectors. It said production could resume on short notice and could have produced thousands of liters of anthrax, botulinum toxin and other agents since the departure of the inspectors in 1998.

As for chemical weapons, the report said Iraq probably had a ''few hundred tons'' of agents to make mustard and sarin nerve gas. Mr. Samore said that amount was less alarming because any invading soldiers would come protected.

In neither case, biological or chemical, has Mr. Hussein developed the means of delivering weapons that could cause vast loss of life, the report concluded. But it warned that Iraq had retained about a dozen short-range missiles that could be fitted with chemical and biological warheads for striking Israel, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Iran or Kuwait.

Mr. Chipman said had it not been for the gulf war, Iraq would have probably developed ''a dozen or so'' nuclear weapons by the end of the 1990's. ''Most importantly,'' the report concluded, ''the scientific and technical expertise of Iraq's nuclear program survived, and Baghdad has tried to keep its core nuclear teams in place working on various civilian projects.''

Mr. Chipman said Mr. Hussein did not have the radioactive material he would need to build a nuclear device and would be unlikely to get the necessary components soon because of strict monitoring.
