
THREATS AND RESPONSES: REBUILDING IRAQ; U.S. Suggests Iraqi-Americans Will Help in Recovery Process
By Eric Schmitt
Feb. 24, 2003

To help rebuild Iraq when Saddam Hussein is ousted, Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz said today, the Pentagon will begin recruiting Iraqi-Americans to serve in the military reserves and hiring them as translators and other temporary civilian employees.

Mr. Wolfowitz announced the initiatives at an afternoon town hall meeting here in suburban Detroit, where thousands of Iraqi-Americans live, the largest such concentration in the United States.

Warning that there is now only a ''small chance'' to avoid war with Iraq, with more than 180,000 American forces massed in the Persian Gulf region, Mr. Wolfowitz appealed to an invitation-only audience of about 250 Iraqi immigrants and naturalized American citizens for their support in reshaping a post-Hussein Iraq.

''We need to work together,'' Mr. Wolfowitz told an often boisterous anti-Hussein crowd at a Ford Motor Company training center turned civic forum here. ''We're on the same team. We have the same goal.''

For the most part, Mr. Wolfowitz was preaching to the choir. Horrific tales of relatives massacred or driven into exile by Mr. Hussein's security forces spilled from one speaker after another when Mr. Wolfowitz took questions after his speech. At one point, a young boy, whose father said he had suffered brain damage from a beating by Iraqi forces, was brought to the front of the room to meet Mr. Wolfowitz.

''Saddam must go! Saddam must go!'' the crowd chanted at the end of the session, with many pushing forward to get a word with Mr. Wolfowitz, the administration's toughest hawk on Iraq. Mr. Wolfowitz had been invited to attend by the Iraqi Forum for Democracy, a political action group based in Ann Arbor, Mich., that supports Mr. Hussein's ouster.

But some Iraqis voiced suspicions about whether they could trust the United States to finish the job in Iraq. Some voiced bitterness over President George Bush's failure to back a Shiite uprising in southern Iraq immediately after the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Others expressed alarm at press reports that the administration might support a Baathist party general as Mr. Hussein's successor, or leave an American officer in charge of Iraq indefinitely.

''They won't be willing to see another dictator after Saddam,'' said Imam Hassan Qazwini, a prominent religious leader at the Islamic Center of America in Detroit.

Mr. Wolfowitz vowed that the administration would never back a ''junior Saddam Hussein.'' And he repeatedly stated that American forces would be ''liberators,'' not an occupying force.

But he cautioned that only the American military could handle some tasks, like destroying hidden weapons of mass destruction, putting out oil field fires and dealing with humanitarian crises.

Citing his boss, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, Mr. Wolfowitz said the United States would be guided by the principle ''Stay as long as necessary, and leave as soon as possible.'' Mr. Wolfowitz added, ''The key for us in getting out quickly is for Iraqis to come together quickly.''

By enlisting the aid of Iraqi-Americans and recent Iraqi immigrants, Mr. Wolfowitz also seemed to be trying to counter criticism from American lawmakers and relief organizations that the administration has failed to adequately plan for the aftermath of any conflict.

''We're establishing a program through which Iraqi-Americans could be hired as temporary civilian employees or, in some cases, independent contractors of the U.S. government,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said. Other defense officials said that could include translators, engineers, scientists, economists and others who could help a fledgling Iraqi administration in Baghdad.

That offer won an enthusiastic reply from many Iraqis afterward.

''I'd go back on the first plane,'' said Safaa Almayahi, 59, an economist here who now works in financial services. ''I'd want to help rebuild the Iraqi economy.''

Mr. Wolfowitz also outlined an initiative to allow Iraqi-Americans to join the military's Individual Ready Reserve, putting their linguistic, cultural and professional skills to work. Defense officials said that once volunteers were vetted for terrorist connections, they could be quickly dispatched to front-line units in a conflict or in a reconstruction effort.

Officials also said that Iraqi-Americans who joined the reserves could be eligible for accelerated United States citizenship, and that their full-time civilian job in the United States would be protected while they were mobilized.

Mr. Wolfowitz also promoted a continuing program coordinated with Iraqi opposition groups to train Iraqi expatriates from around the world to support American military operations in Iraq.
