

Cargo Insurance Would End 48 Hours Into an Iraqi War
By Joseph B. Treaster
March 19, 2003

International insurance companies notified the world's airlines and the operators of oil tankers and cargo ships yesterday that their coverage for wartime cargo losses in the Middle East would be canceled within 48 hours of the start of any hostilities in Iraq. The coverage can be renegotiated, insurance brokers said, but at much higher prices.

Some brokers said they regarded the decision on cargo as a precursor to a broader cancellation notice for coverage on the airliners and ships themselves.

''We may see something tomorrow,'' said Andrea Jansz, an analyst at the Willis Group, one of the world's largest insurance brokers.

The brokers said that the new prices could be as much as 50 times the prewar prices for cargo coverage and that costs of war coverage for aircraft and ships could easily increase tenfold for a single voyage or flight. As a result, they said, most commercial air and sea traffic to the Persian Gulf region would probably be halted.


The brokers said the cancellation of war coverage for cargo would apply to all commercial insurance policies. But they said it was not immediately clear whether the cancellation would extend to coverage that is being provided by the United States government to the troubled airline industry at heavily subsidized prices.

Airlines and shipping companies routinely buy war insurance as a part of their overall coverage, and it is intended to pay for losses in ''unexpected acts of war,'' said Stephen Catlin, the chief executive of Catlin Underwriting Agencies, a part of Lloyd's of London.

But these policies usually include a provision for cancellation of coverage once a war breaks out and the danger has shifted from possible to actual, he said. The typical policy provides for cancellation in seven days with the opportunity to renegotiate at higher prices. But, without explanation, the War Risk Rating Committee, an organization of international insurers including Lloyd's, said that in the case of war in Iraq, the coverage on cargo would be canceled after two days.

Ms. Jansz, a specialist in coverage for cargo ships, said the shorter cancellation period appeared to be an effort to encourage vessels and aircraft to get out of harm's way in light of President Bush's ultimatum on Monday evening that President Saddam Hussein and his two sons must leave Iraq by 8 p.m. on Wednesday or face a military attack.

''By making it 48 hours,'' she said, ''they are essentially being encouraged by their underwriters to turn tail and get out of there.''

Mr. Catlin estimated that cargo ships operating in the Persian Gulf region were valued at about $40 million and often carried $40 million worth of cargo -- whether oil, wheat, rice or containers filled with anything from food to television sets or computers.

He said that in peacetime, the premium for replacement insurance on a ship might be $300,000 to $600,000 a year, and that in prewar periods, war insurance might cost an additional 10 percent to 20 percent. In wartime, he said, premiums are often calculated by voyage, rather than annually.

''You could easily be paying 10 times the annual premium just for one voyage,'' Mr. Catlin said.

Yesterday's cancellation notice came as insurers in London were seeing a surge in sales of war and terrorism coverage. John Eltham, a director of Miller Insurance Services, a broker that arranges war and terrorism coverages, said companies operating in the Persian Gulf region were buying war coverage, which is usually not included in standard property coverages. He said terrorism coverage sales had jumped in European cities.

The costs for war coverage for factories, office buildings, hotels and oil drilling and pumping equipment in the Persian Gulf region have jumped sharply from as recently as three or four months ago, and even at much higher prices, full coverage was rarely available, he said.

Mr. Eltham said one oil company with $200 million in standard property coverage had been able to buy only $25 million worth of war coverage in London on Friday. Thus, if the oil company's property is destroyed in war, he said, it would be able to recover only one-eighth of its value. He said he could not provide a specific number, but that the cost of the limited amount of war insurance had been equal to about what the company had paid for $200 million in standard coverage.
