

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; 'Clear as Glass' Against War With Iraq, Germans Still Agree to Aid U.S. and Israel
By Mark Landler
Nov. 28, 2002

Chancellor Gerhard Schröder said today that he would grant the United States unrestricted freedom to fly in German airspace, as well as to shuttle troops in and out of American military bases here. He did reiterate, however, that Germany would not take part in a war against Iraq.

Mr. Schröder also said Germany would supply Israel with German-made armored vehicles and the Patriot antimissile system to protect it from Iraqi chemical, biological or nuclear attack.

The chancellor's gesture to the Americans was not a surprise, since the United States already has legal rights to move its troops around Germany. Mr. Schröder turned away the Bush administration's other requests for support, saying he would not alter his ''clear as glass'' stance against a war.

That list, submitted by Washington to about 50 countries, includes requests for missile-defense systems, military police and financial and material help in rebuilding a postwar Iraq.


Still, the chancellor's agreement to supply Israel with the American-made Patriot missile, as well as the Fuchs tank, seemed calculated to soften Germany's image of refusing to play any role in what could become a multilateral campaign.

Mr. Schröder's antiwar position helped him win a narrow victory in elections two months ago. But it left a bitter residue in German-American relations, which have yet to improve despite a Schröder-Bush handshake at the NATO summit meeting in Prague last week.

''This helps get the German government out of a corner,'' said Bernhard May, deputy director of the German Council on Foreign Relations. ''They can help without changing their language on Iraq.''

Germany supplied Patriot batteries to Israel during the 1991 Persian Gulf war, during which they were used as a sporadically effective defense against Iraqi Scud missiles. More than a year ago, Israel lodged another request for the antimissile system with Germany, and the government has recently come under criticism for dragging its feet.

Two days ago, Mr. Schröder said, Israel tacked on a request for an unspecified number of Fuchs tanks, a six-wheeled armored vehicle that carries 10 soldiers. Some models are equipped to detect, and destroy, chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, though officials at the Defense Ministry said Israel had asked for a more basic version that functions solely as a troop transport.

Germany currently has six Fuchs tanks, with 52 troops, stationed in Kuwait, to protect the Kuwatis.

Mr. Schröder said he viewed the Fuchs as a defensive weapon. ''We do not have concerns in principle against such a defensive use, and in the protection of the Israeli people,'' he said.

He added that Germans had an obligation to help Israel ''out of moral as well as historic grounds'' -- a reference to the Nazi era.

Drawing a distinction between the defense of Israel and an attack on Iraq, Mr. Schröder said the tanks stationed in Kuwait would not take part in any military campaign without a new mandate from the German Parliament, which the chancellor said he would not seek.

Mr. May noted, however, that the Parliament recently approved the deployment of up to 800 additional troops to Kuwait, as part of an extension of the German involvement in the campaign against terrorism.

If American or other coalition troops were to come under a chemical, biological or nuclear attack near the Iraqi border, Mr. May said, it would be difficult to imagine the Germans not becoming involved.

''Schröder will have to stand by his refusal to participate, but the definition of participation will change,'' he said.

The decision to allow the United States access to German airspace and freedom to move troops was not hard, experts said, because the chancellor had little room for maneuver. Legal agreements give the United States broad latitude in such matters.

A senior German official said Mr. Schröder might have had legal grounds to restrict American access. But he did not consider it, given his desire to heal the rift between Berlin and Washington.

As he tries to avoid further offending the United States, the chancellor must also worry about his political standing in Germany. Having already broken a campaign pledge not to raise taxes, analysts say, Mr. Schröder cannot appear to be backing away from his position on Iraq.

While some left-wing members of the chancellor's coalition grumbled today that the government should have allowed more debate, actions in support of Israel generally draw widespread backing here.
