

THREATS AND RESPONSES: CONGRESS; Top Democrats Say a War Against Iraq Is Premature
By Carl Hulse
March 7, 2003

The two Democratic leaders of Congress said today that it would be premature for the United States to initiate armed conflict with Iraq, with Senator Tom Daschle accusing President Bush of ''rushing to war'' without exhausting other remedies.

''I just fail to concede that war is inevitable,'' Mr. Daschle said.

In comments that starkly illustrated Democratic unease with the president's handling of the confrontation with Iraq, Mr. Daschle and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, said Mr. Bush needed to better explain his rationale for a pre-emptive strike both to the American public and the world.

''Obviously the case has not been made,'' said Ms. Pelosi, who last year joined a majority of House Democrats in opposing the resolution authorizing Mr. Bush to move against Iraq. ''It has not been made to the American people. It has not been made to the world community. It has not been made to the Security Council.''

The two Democrats spoke at separate meetings with reporters before the president's news conference tonight.

Mr. Daschle said that when he supported the resolution on Iraq last fall, he presumed that the administration would be able to build the same type of broad international coalition against that country as the previous Bush administration did before the 1991 Persian Gulf war. Instead, he said, there has been an ''extraordinary disintegration'' of international support.

''Our situation has put us into a more isolated position than I ever anticipated,'' said Mr. Daschle, who said the United States would face a ''significant risk'' if it moved against Iraq with only scattered international support.

Though other Democrats in the House and Senate have called for Congress to reopen debate on Iraq and allow a second vote on a resolution, Ms. Pelosi and Mr. Daschle have said they do not think that is warranted. But Mr. Daschle and the Senate majority leader, Bill Frist, did agree today to try to provide floor time on Friday to senators who wanted to express their views on Iraq.

In addition, members of the Congressional Black Caucus, who are all Democrats, wrote the president today requesting that he meet with them to discuss the ''current crisis with Iraq'' as well as domestic issues. And Senators Jon Corzine of New Jersey and Carl Levin of Michigan, both Democrats, asked the Senate Budget Committee to postpone its consideration of a budget until the administration provided an estimate of the cost of a war with Iraq.

''The administration is simply ignoring the costs of war as we establish our nation's budget,'' Mr. Corzine said. ''That's irresponsible.''

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, who has been a leading opponent of invading Iraq, said the president should let the weapons inspections continue.

''If inspections work, we avoid war,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''If they don't, we will gain the cooperation of the international community in fighting the war and in winning the peace.''

In their appearances today, Mr. Daschle and Ms. Pelosi both said that they were not unequivocally opposed to military action in Iraq but that the United States needed to give diplomatic solutions more time.

''I am not against the use of force per se,'' said Ms. Pelosi, who noted that she supported action in Serbia during the Clinton administration. ''It is just a timing question. And if the case had been made so conclusively that a unanimous vote of the U.N. supported it, I think that that would be very compelling.''

Mr. Daschle, of South Dakota, said he would back military confrontation when it remained the last option.

''I strongly believe we have not yet reached that point,'' he said. ''I think it is critical that we work more effectively through the diplomatic channels and in the international community to bring about a peaceful result rather than a military result to this issue.''

He conceded that a wide range of opinion existed among Congressional Democrats about the administration's policy. But he said Democrats had found common ground on one aspect of the administration's handling of Iraq.

''There is virtual unanimity,'' Mr. Daschle said, ''in our express concern about the approach the administration has used. In our view, they have failed diplomatically. In our view, they are rushing to war without adequate concern for the ramifications of doing so unilaterally or with a very small coalition of nations.''
