
TRACES OF TERROR: THE REGION; Arabs, by Degrees, Oppose American Attack on Iraq
By Jane Perlez
Sept. 6, 2002

The Arab League warned the Bush administration today against attacking Iraq, but the public display of unanimity masked degrees of opposition to an attack, diplomats said at the end of a two day gathering of Arab foreign ministers.

The ministers had been expected to call formally on Iraq to readmit United Nations weapons inspectors, but a resolution at the end of the meeting, which included Iraq's foreign minister, Naji Sabri Ahmad al-Hadithi, failed to mention inspectors.

In an effort to keep up the appearance of consensus while the Iraqi was present, the closed-door meetings were devoted as much if not more to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as to Iraq, diplomats said.

Later, Mr. Hadithi expressed his gratitude to the group, saying, ''We are pleased all Arab countries express total rejection of the aggressive intentions of the United States.''

The secretary general of the league, Amr Moussa, who is known for his flamboyant language, said at a news conference that American military action against Iraq would ''open the gates of hell in the Middle East because you can never tell the results.''

Mr. Moussa was reflecting what one diplomat called ''a genuine concern'' that the Bush administration was intent not only on striking against Baghdad but also on remaking the map of the Middle East. According to this view, he said, pro-Israeli American officials believe that an attack on Iraq would lead to the capitulation not only of the Iraqis, but of the Palestinians, too.

It was left to Mr. Moussa, a former Egyptian foreign minister, who spoke after most of the ministers had left the headquarters, to say that the members supported the return of the weapons inspectors.

Underlying the reluctance to deal head-on with the Iraqi situation were the differences among the ministers, participants said. Some represent important regional allies whose bases are essential for the Bush administration to conduct a war against Baghdad.

Saudi Arabia, whose bases were used as a staging ground in the Persian Gulf war in 1991, has said its soil cannot be used again for an assault on Iraq. The Saudis feel far less pressure from Iraq this time than they did in 1990, when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait and threatened the Saudi oil fields, diplomats said.

Of all Washington's Arab allies, economically weak Jordan feels the most exposed by the war plans against Iraq. Jordan has publicly stated that it will not allow the United States to position troops on its territory for an attack.

About half the population in Jordan is Palestinian, and an American assault against Iraq would certainly roil the Palestinians. Further complicating Jordan's situation is the presence of a large number of Iraqis. Under an exception granted by the United Nations after the 1991 war, Jordan buys most of its oil from Iraq and about 25 percent of Jordan's exports go to Iraq.

Ruled in 1991 by King Hussein, Jordan did not join the international coalition against Iraq. Under his son and successor, King Abdullah, it is not clear what route Jordan would take in the event of an attack, but Western diplomats expressed doubt that the king would tacitly side with Iraq, as his father did.

In contrast, Qatar has allowed the Bush administration to quietly position forces there and extend an air base for possible use as a command post for airstrikes against Iraq.

The government of Qatar has made it clear, though, that it would like Baghdad to allow the return of weapons inspectors.

The overwhelming message for the Iraqi foreign minister, an Arab diplomat said today, was that in order to sustain the public support that Iraq had won today, Mr. Hussein had to allow the inspectors back. --------------------

Al Qaeda Interviews to Air

DUBAI, United Arab Emirates, Sept. 5 (AP) -- The Arab television network Al Jazeera said today that it will broadcast interviews with two Al Qaeda members who admit to helping plan and carry out the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States.

Al Jazeera said that Khalid Shaikh Mohammed -- a close associate of the presumed mastermind of the attacks, Mohammed Atta -- and Ramzi Omar, also known as Ramzi Binalshibh, who is one of the highest-ranking Al Qaeda members and one of the most wanted fugitives in the world, were interviewed recently at a secret location, but did not elaborate further.
