

Bush, in Tokyo, Hails Koizumi And Repeats Sternness on Iraq
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Feb. 18, 2002

President Bush said again today that ''all options'' are open in dealing with Iraq, and also strongly affirmed American support for the ailing economy of Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan.

At a joint news conference this afternoon, the first day of a six-day diplomatic trip, Mr. Bush said that ''I will keep all options on the table'' regarding Iraq and ''there is nothing else to talk about.''

Of Mr. Koizumi, Mr. Bush said: ''I'm confident in this man's leadership ability, I'm confident in his strategy and I'm confident in his ability to carry ot that strategy.'' Although the positions of the two leaders appeared close on the need to reform Japan's economy, and on their ability to work together in the campaign against terrorism, they differed on their approaches to North Korea, which Mr. Bush has called an ''axis of evil.''

Mr. Bush described North Korea as the creator of starvation and said South Korea was the home of freedom, but Mr. Koizumi was more conciliatory.

The priminister said his nation, ''through cooperation and coordination with the U.S. and South Korea, would like to work on normalizing our relationship with North Korea.''

Earlier today, at the start of a one-on-one meeting, Mr. Bush called Mr. Koizumi ''a great reformer,'' but the president was expected to urge the prime minister in private to make urgent reforms in a Japanese economy that is verging on crisis.

The president is at the start of a trip to Japan, South Korea and China, with its mission made more difficult by Mr. Bush's tough talk in the United States of Iraq, Iran and North Korea as part of an ''axis of evil.''

Mr. Bush's remark has set off alarms, particularly among the South Koreans, who are worried that it could lead to further tensions or war with the North, but also among the European allies.

Asked about the European reaction before the start of the meeting with Mr. Koizumi, Mr. Bush replied, ''They understand our point.''

Concerns over the Japanese economy were expected to take up much of the discussions between the two leaders. In an interview with Asian journalists in Washington on Friday that was released Saturday by the White House, Mr. Bush said that while Mr. Koizumi had ''done everything he said he would do,'' the Japanese economy needed ''significant reforms and restructuring, as well as a focus on its loan portfolios.'' Mr. Bush added that ''the Japanese economy must restructure, and must deal with her loans, her bad loans.''

Some Japanese government officials said over the weekend that they were taken aback by the bluntness of Mr. Bush's remarks.

Mr. Bush's trip comes almost exactly a decade after his father made a calamitous visit to Tokyo, when the former president collapsed from an intestinal flu in the lap of the prime minister during a formal banquet. At the time, the economic health of the two nations was reversed, with the United States in recession and Japan still enjoying the boom times of its old ''bubble'' economy.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Koizumi were also to discuss global warming. While the Japanese have politely praised Mr. Bush's recent plan to control greenhouse gases as evidence that America is committed to the issue, they have also made clear their hope that the United States will return to a treaty, negotiated in Kyoto, with other industrialized nations. A group of about 50 Japanese and American demonstrators protested Mr. Bush's environmental policies near the American Embassy in Tokyo on Sunday, shortly before Mr. Bush arrived.

This morning, a robust-looking Mr. Bush said that he felt ''great'' as he began his day with a trip to Meiji Jingu, a Shinto shrine.

He and Laura Bush, who held hands, were accompanied by a chief priest of the shrine, dressed in full-length cream-colored silk.

Mr. Bush spent about 10 minutes inside the shrine, then signed a guest book. From there he left for a display of yabusame, or archery from horses, an ancient Japanese religious practice. In a large field near the shrine, Mr. Bush sat next to Mr. Koizumi and watched as horsemen rode by at a breakneck gallop and shot arrows into a small clay target. ''Oh, yeah!'' the president said when one horseman hit the target.
