
THREATS AND RESPONSES: AID; U.N. Planning To Feed Iraqis In a War, Annan Says
By Julia Preston With James Dao
Feb. 14, 2003

Secretary General Kofi Annan told the Security Council today that the United Nations was planning to feed up to 10 million hungry Iraqi civilians and care for at least 2.6 million refugees in the wake of an American-led war in Iraq.

Saying that his organization was moving to a ''higher level of preparedness'' for military conflict in Iraq, Mr. Annan met with the 15 Council ambassadors in his offices here to appeal for $120 million to pay for urgent contingency planning.

Mr. Annan emphasized repeatedly that he did not regard war as inevitable and that he was engaging only in ''prudent'' advance planning, according to diplomats who attended the session. But the midday meeting added to the sense here that the start of American military action to topple President Saddam Hussein of Iraq might be only weeks away.

The figures Mr. Annan cited filled in a newly specific picture of the tremendous displacement and hardship that the United Nations is anticipating for Iraq's civilians in the event of war.

Kenzo Oshima, the top United Nations official for emergency relief aid, said the organization had already moved food, shelter and health supplies into the region to care for 600,000 refugees both inside Iraq and across its borders. At a news conference after Mr. Annan's closed meeting, Mr. Oshima said that the United Nations was expecting a ''huge, gigantic task.''

He noted that the United Nations, through what is called the oil-for-food program, was currently distributing 460,000 tons of food per month in Iraq. This, he said, is ''four times the largest quantity we were able to deliver'' in the days immediately after the fighting subsided in Afghanistan.

After 11 years of severe economic sanctions, Iraq's economy is paralyzed, with about 60 percent of the population depending entirely on the United Nations program for their food, he said. The program uses income from Iraqi oil exports to buy food, medicine and other critical goods.

At the session, the American ambassador, John D. Negroponte, said that the Bush administration had already provided $18.3 million for the contingency planning and that there was $40 million more in the pipeline, several participants in the meeting said. Bush administration officials are calculating that about 2.2 million people will become refugees in the fighting.

In Washington, InterAction, an umbrella organization of 160 relief aid groups, questioned whether the Bush administration was prepared to cope with the humanitarian crisis the United Nations was predicting.

''The U.S. government may be unprepared to mount an adequate response to meet the relief and reconstruction needs of a country in which 60 percent of the people already rely on international donations to live,'' said Mary E. McClymont, InterAction's president and chief executive. The group has been meeting regularly with officials at the Pentagon to plan aid for Iraqi civilians during and after a war.

In a confidential planning document dated Jan. 7, Mr. Oshima's office reported that infant mortality rates in Iraq were 2.5 times the level of 1990, when the sanctions were initially imposed to punish Iraq for invading Kuwait. ''We can predict a fairly bad situation particularly among children because the malnutrition among children is already high,'' Mr. Oshima said today.

United Nations and United States officials said today that they expected the world organization to play a major role in caring for refugees and providing food during and after a war because relatively few nongovernmental organizations have aid programs in Iraq. But several Council diplomats acknowledged that the administration's plans could be thrown into doubt if the United States did not obtain another Council resolution to support its war to disarm Mr. Hussein.

But Mr. Oshima said he has had only ''very limited contacts'' with the United States military to discuss plans. He said that the United Nations' relief effort could be stymied if Mr. Hussein used chemical or biological weapons against Iraqi civilians to stop the advance of allied troops, as Pentagon officials have predicted.

Ms. McClymont questioned the administration's willingness to respond to a chemical or biological attack on civilians.

A senior administration official said that American troops would do whatever they could to help civilians injured in such attacks.

''To the extent that military doctors have time, I'm sure they would tend to people if they could,'' the official said.
