

Strained Relations, And Spilled Merlot; Restaurateur Shows Displeasure Over French Leaders' Stance on Iraq
By Andrew Jacobs
March 8, 2003

It was a sight to make even the most patriotic teetotaler cringe. Anthony M. Tola was spilling a perfectly supple but robust bottle of French merlot into the toilet, a self-satisfied grin on his face. A day earlier, he said, he had popped the corks on six bottles of Dom Pérignon, retail value $1,000, and dispatched their golden contents into the same commode.

Mr. Tola, a restaurateur with a grudge against America's erstwhile bon ami, was trying to make a point. ''I have no animosity toward French people, their culture or their cuisine,'' said Mr. Tola, 49, whose restaurant, The Old Bay, serves Cajun cuisine. ''I'm just trying to show my displeasure with their political policy.''

But rather than lighting a fuse, Mr. Tola's cri de coeur protesting France's opposition to an American-led attack on Iraq only served to highlight how divided Americans are about the possibility of war. Throughout the day, as word of Mr. Tola's actions spread, The Old Bay was flooded with e-mail messages and telephone calls either praising or condemning his gesture. Mr. Tola said the calls were running heavily in his favor, although he was clearly jarred by some of the critics, a few of them longtime patrons who vowed never to return.

One man left a message calling him ''foul and vicious.'' Another vowed to picket for peace outside his restaurant and drive him out of business.

As they drifted into the restaurant this afternoon and learned about his protest, some of his customers voiced support, while many said they had no gripe with the French or their resistance to an American-led war.

Others simply had a visceral response to the image of good booze going down the drain.

''What a ridiculous waste,'' said Phil Kriser, a 21-year-old student at Rutgers University. ''I wish he had poured it into a funnel and into my mouth.''

But once they moved beyond the splashy symbolism of Mr. Tola's act, and got used to his decision to replace the French cabernet sauvignons with Napa Valley zinfandels, patrons expressed a range of opinions, their emotions raw and vehement.

Rick Klacik, 53, a Verizon employee who eats lunch at The Old Bay five days a week, was furious about the French, saying they had shown a consistent lack of loyalty and respect for the United States. ''They haven't backed us in any conflict,'' Mr. Klacik said. ''Even if someone gave me a bottle of French wine, which has never happened, I wouldn't drink it.''

Sipping a glass of Chivas Regal -- Scottish, despite the French-sounding name -- Mr. Klacik was so enraged that he suggested the French could use a taste of the horrors that had visited the United States on Sept. 11, 2001. ''For instance, if something happened to the Eiffel Tower, maybe they would see what we're going through,'' he said.

Catherine Shrope-Mok, 47, a Merrill Lynch employee from Princeton, nearly tossed her quiche in the garbage when told about Mr. Tola's actions. ''If I had known, I would have gone to the nice Irish pub around the corner instead,'' she said.

An opponent of war and a proud Francophile, Ms. Shrope-Mok said she thought that the anti-French animus was misguided. ''I think the hostility comes from Americans who go to Paris and expect the French to speak English to them,'' she said.

Mr. Tola, for one, said he had never been to France, nor has he ever made the acquaintance of a Frenchman. (He did, however, once have a Belgian friend, he said.) To amplify his anguished opposition to the French government, Mr. Tola sought the help of an advertising agency, which produced black-and-white stills of the ceremonial dumping and then helped draw up a press release, which went out over the wires Thursday night.

But by this morning, when the television news stations began calling, Mr. Tola had already disposed of his cache of French bubbly.

He tried posing with a row of domestic and Australian-made Champagnes, set before a pair of American flags, but a New York Post photographer wanted something more dramatic.

Fortunately the restaurant's bartender had saved an empty bottle of Dom. After having it filled it with ginger ale, Mr. Tola marched to the bathroom, turned toward the camera, and let it pour.
