

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTERVIEW; CBS News and White House Differ on Rebutting Hussein
By Bill Carter
Feb. 27, 2003

The exclusive interview by CBS News with Saddam Hussein, broadcast last night, led to a disagreement between the network and the White House yesterday after CBS News declined a request to have a White House representative appear during the interview to rebut claims made by the Iraqi president.

CBS News first told the White House that it would grant the request if President Bush wanted to appear to comment on the interview, then amended its permission to include Vice President Dick Cheney and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell.

Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, said, ''The White House and CBS do not see eye to eye on this.'' At the White House news briefing yesterday, Mr. Fleischer congratulated the CBS anchor, Dan Rather, on landing the interview, which appeared on the CBS News program ''60 Minutes II.'' In a telephone interview, Mr. Fleischer credited CBS News and Mr. Rather with conducting a ''journalistically solid interview.''

But he added: ''It's propaganda; it's lies from a dictator, a torturer and a murderer.'' He said it would have been appropriate for either him or for Dan Bartlett, the White House communications chief, to be allowed to rebut Mr. Hussein's comments.

The CBS News president, Andrew Heyward, said the interview was legitimate, and conducted by ''one of the most experienced journalists in the world, with a subject who has not spoken to an American journalist in 12 years.''

Mr. Heyward added: ''It appeared within the proper context, with tough, direct questions and perspective provided. This was not the Iraqi State of the Union Address. The White House is treating this as though it was an unfiltered message from Osama bin Laden.''

CBS News executives said that the original request from the White House asked for the opportunity for a White House representative to appear several times to rebut whatever had just been said by Mr. Hussein.

Mr. Heyward said CBS News believed this was unnecessary. ''Ari Fleischer has access to the American public every single day,'' he said.

The networks all agreed to broadcast a speech by President Bush last night even though the White House did not make a formal request that they do so.

Instead it simply informed the networks that the president planned a major address on Iraq and it was up to the networks to decide whether to broadcast it. Citing the potential imminence of war, all decided to do so.

Mr. Fleischer said one reason he wanted to rebut Mr. Hussein was to make clear to broadcast news media that Iraqi representatives should not make unsubstantiated charges on the air.

He predicted that, in the event of war, Iraqis would try to get on American news outlets with claims of ''Americans blowing up a dam'' or other facilities. ''If it's all lies, why put it on in the first place?'' Mr. Fleischer said.

Mr. Rather conducted the interview with Mr. Hussein in Baghdad on Monday. He said afterward that he and other CBS News staff had worked for over a year for the interview.

He also cited the help of Ramsey Clark, the former attorney general, for ''speaking up for my credibility and CBS News's credibility.'' Mr. Clark, who now runs an organization that strongly opposes any war against Iraq, has been in Baghdad and has had access to Mr. Hussein.

The interview was conducted under heavy security, Mr. Rather said, and under some strict conditions laid down by the Iraqis. CBS News was not allowed to use its own cameras and had to wait for more than half a day while the Iraqis edited the interview, combining three tapes into one.

CBS News, in a disclaimer, indicated that it had used its own translators and checked thoroughly to ensure that the tape had not been censored and was satisfied it had not been. Mr. Fleischer said he would not comment on the Iraqi restrictions accepted by CBS News, but another White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, asked how CBS News might deal with a demand from the White House that it not use its own cameras in an interview with President Bush.

Mr. Heyward said: ''Thank goodness we don't live in a country whose president is too embattled and scared to have anybody else's camera crew come in and do an interview.''
