

THREATS AND RESPONSES: TERRORIST LINKS; Iraq Militants Who Killed Kurd Minister Take Hostage
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 11, 2003

The Islamic group Ansar al-Islam, which the United States claims has ties to both Saddam Hussein and Al Qaeda, abducted a man from a village in northern Iraq on Sunday, bringing to three the number of hostages it has taken in recent days, Kurdish officials said.

The latest kidnapping came the day after the group assassinated a minister of the Kurdish parliament in what the authorities describe as an intricately laid trap.

Kurdish officials said the killers posed as peace negotiators and lured the minister to a quiet setting, then shot him as he was completing a letter to Ansar ending with the traditional Kurdish sign-off, Live Always.

Seventeen other people were shot in the attack, and two men were taken hostage as the gunmen escaped.

The group then struck again on Sunday, abducting a nephew of one of the previously taken hostages from the village of Khurmal. The reasons for the latest abduction were uncertain, security officials said, and it was not clear tonight if the man had been tricked into his capture or simply snatched.

But the Kurdish government here said all of the hostages were believed to be alive, and had been moved to an Ansar prison near Said Salim, a village on the border with Iran and in territory controlled by the militants.

Dr. Barham A. Salih, prime minister of the eastern Kurdish zone, said the government would begin negotiating soon for the hostages' release and had contacted a potential intermediary to open discussion. But he offered little hope that talks would succeed.

''We will try, but it is very difficult to negotiate with these murderers, if not impossible,'' he said. ''We have to fear the worst.''

The families of the abducted men also planned to offer ransoms for the men's freedom, but the prime minister said it was an idea that made the authorities uneasy. ''As in any hostage situation, you have to be careful not to encourage hostage-taking,'' Dr. Salih said.

The abduction on Sunday followed the killing of Shawkat Hajji Mushir, a member of the Kurdish parliament, as he met an emissary from Ansar to discuss a potential mass defection.

The Taliban-like group, with an estimated 650 fighters, has been at war with the Kurdish government since 2001. It has been accused of assassination attempts and battlefield mutilation of fallen adversaries, as well as brewing toxins in a small poisons laboratory.

In a presentation to the United Nations Security Council last week, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said the group was supported by both Baghdad and Al Qaeda.

Kurdish officials said Mr. Muhsir was killed as he wrote a letter to Hemin Benishari, the leader of Ansar's Fatah Brigade, in which Mr. Mushir was refining conditions for the surrender of 121 of the brigade's fighters.

Under these terms, the men would have been allowed to defect, move to a new location, form a new political party and declare that they were not hostile to other Kurdish groups. In return they would have received amnesty and money, Kurdish officials said.

The officials said the defections would have split Ansar, and might have reduced its strength to the point that the government could advance beyond the stalemate that has defined the war since late in 2001. ''It was very big bait for us,'' a security official said.

The authorities now say Ansar toyed with Mr. Mushir.

A copy of the letter, obtained by The New York Times, showed that the minister was shot by Mr. Benishari's emissary after writing a detailed memo about the wording of the Fatah Brigade's public declaration of defection. He had not yet signed his name, and was midway through the traditional Kurdish closing to correspondence when he stopped. The letter is splattered with blood.

Ansar provided details of the amnesty talks and claimed responsibility for the killing today on a Web site, www.nawend.com, which said that the Kurdish party had wanted to ''deceive the members of Ansar al-Islam with money and destroy the steel lines of the holy warriors.''

After shooting the minister, Ansar gunmen opened fire on the home in the village of Qamesh Tapa where the talks were taking place, killing two security officials and three civilians outright. Twelve other people were wounded, including Daroon Fazil, an 8-year-old girl who died today.
