

Iraqis, Reversing Course, Ask to Meet U.N. Arms Inspectors
By Barbara Crossette
Aug. 2, 2002

The Iraqi government, suddenly reversing its longstanding refusal to deal with United Nations weapons inspectors, asked Secretary General Kofi Annan yesterday to send the head of the organization's inspection commission and his team of experts to Baghdad for talks.

The invitation to a Baghdad meeting was the first since weapons inspectors were withdrawn late in 1998 in anticipation of American bombing raids over Baghdad. The request was issued as reports accumulated indicating that the United States may be preparing to attack Iraq again, with far greater intensity than before, to end the regime of Saddam Hussein.

United Nations officials reacted cautiously, saying that as in the past, Mr. Hussein might be trying to head off disaster, not signal new cooperation. Some diplomats have also wondered whether the United States has become so intent on its goal of toppling Mr. Hussein that any Iraqi compliance with inspectors might now be moot. But the move nonetheless offered the first hope that weapons inspections could resume in Iraq.

In a letter to Mr. Annan, Iraq's foreign minister, Naji Sabri, said that the government wanted the talks to take place ''at the earliest agreed time.'' The letter was first obtained by Reuters yesterday. In Baghdad, Iraq's vice president, Taha Yassin Ramadan, told the official satellite television network yesterday that more dialogue with the United Nations was a ''healthy solution.''

The weapons inspectors who left Iraq in 1998 worked for the United Nations Special Commission, known as Unscom, which Iraq later refused to deal with. Two years ago -- in part to meet Iraq's objections to the composition of Unscom, which it saw as an American spy operation -- the Security Council created a new inspection team. The team, the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, is fully under the jurisdiction of the United Nations and is not reliant on national governments to supply experts.

Hans Blix, a Swedish international lawyer and disarmament expert who had been head of the International Atomic Energy Commission, was named executive chairman of the new team, known as Unmovic. Dr. Blix was not available for comment last night, and Mr. Annan's spokesman did not respond to calls.

A United Nations official said that the letter from Baghdad, dated Aug. 1, had been sent directly to Mr. Annan, not to Dr. Blix. Dr. Blix was present in recent rounds of talks in New York and Vienna between Mr. Annan and the Iraqis.

In interviews over the last two years, Dr. Blix has said repeatedly that the Iraqis want intrusive inspections to be ruled out in favor of long-term monitoring. Some comments in the new letter to Mr. Annan seem to suggest that Iraq's feelings have not changed. Agreeing to that request would imply that Iraq had met the demands of earlier inspections, but Dr. Blix said they had not.

He also said that the last two years had been put to good use archiving and cross-referencing everything known about the Iraqi weapons programs and commissioning and studying satellite photography to look for changes in suspect sites on the ground in Iraq.

Even so, he has repeatedly said, he has to return inspectors to Iraq to establish what he calls new ''baselines'' from which to work on determining whether Iraq has completed ''key disarmament tasks'' as called for in United Nations resolutions.

In nearly four years without inspections, the Iraqis, with a previous record of carrying out illegal arms development and lying about the work until caught by inspectors, are thought to have resumed arms production, or at least research.

Mr. Sabri, the Iraqi foreign minister, seemed to insist in the letter yesterday that agreement could be reached to leapfrog tough inspections. ''We believe that this review will be an important step toward the appropriate legal and technical assessment and treatment of the issues of disarmament and to establish a solid base for the next stage of monitoring and inspection activities,'' the letter read.

At the end of the 1991 Persian Gulf war, Iraq pledged to end programs in biological, chemical and nuclear weapons as well as the development of long-range missiles to deliver them. Comprehensive sanctions were imposed on Iraq by the Security Council, along with orders that these sanctions could not be lifted until Iraq had fully complied with disarmament tasks.
