

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE WHITE HOUSE; Iraq Makes U.N. Seem 'Foolish,' Bush Asserts
By David E. Sanger
Oct. 29, 2002

President Bush used two campaign appearances today to turn up pressure on the United Nations just days ahead of its vote on Iraq, arguing that Saddam Hussein had made the organization look ''foolish'' and questioning whether the Security Council has ''the will or the courage'' to enforce its own resolutions.

Mr. Bush's challenge to the United Nations, the last of which came with the martial backdrop of two aging jet fighters at an air and space museum here, came as the White House declared that time had run out at the United Nations, and that the United States would demand a vote on an Iraq resolution, whether it wins the wording it wants or not.

With each campaign stop, Mr. Bush reiterated -- sometimes nearly shouting -- that the United States was willing to disarm Mr. Hussein without the explicit authorization of the United Nations.

''If the United Nations doesn't have the will or the courage to disarm Saddam Hussein and if Saddam Hussein will not disarm, for the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom, the United States will lead a coalition to disarm Saddam Hussein,'' Mr. Bush said here at a Republican rally on the site of the former Lowry Air Force Base. His comment drew prolonged cheers, as did his statement earlier in the day, in Alamagordo, N.M., that Mr. Hussein ''has made the United Nations look foolish.''

Mr. Bush's rhetorical challenges to the United Nations have steadily escalated in recent days, as he has faced more and more resistance from allies. But while the president has sounded more willing to abandon the United Nations process, some in the administration have argued that unless the president sets a deadline and threatens to act alone, the issue would be debated endlessly in the United Nations.

''You could argue that the best way to get the U.N. to act decisively is to convince everyone that the president will do the same thing with a resolution, or without one, '' an administration official said today.

Aboard Air Force One this morning, Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman, said: ''The United Nations has debated this now long enough.''

He added, ''The time has come for people to raise their hands and cast their vote and either announce that they will return to the ways of the 90's, with a weak, ineffective system of inspection, or recognize that Saddam Hussein has taken advantage of weakness and the world needs to do something different.''

At the same time, the White House's actions suggest that Mr. Bush is approaching the United Nations vote much as he has approached big votes in Congress: Setting aside time to twist arms and cajole, and leaving open the exact timing of the vote until it works to his maximum advantage.

Mr. Bush has reorganized his campaign schedule in recent days and returned to Washington this afternoon so that he can devote Tuesday and Wednesday to calling world leaders, and trying to narrow the differences with France, Russia and Mexico over the proposed resolution. And this afternoon, White House officials told reporters that, despite their insistence that time had run out at the United Nations, they were not ruling out the possibility that a vote on Iraq could stretch into next week, perhaps beyond the elections on Nov. 5.

In his campaigning today, Mr. Bush was clearly reveling in the fact that he was appearing in the West, the area where he feels more at home. He urged the crowd in Alamagordo to vote for Steve Pearce, running for an open seat in one of the state's three congressional districts, and for Republican John Sanchez, who is facing Bill Clinton's former energy secretary, Bill Richardson, in the race for governor.

In Colorado today, Mr. Bush was visiting for the second time to aid Senator Wayne Allard, who is running for a second term and finds himself in a virtual tie with Tom Strickland, his Democratic challenger. But a range of other Republican candidates crowded the stage with Mr. Bush at the former Air Force base, a background that reminded voters of Mr. Bush's emphasis on national security issues in his effort to help Republicans keep control of the House and win back control of the Senate.