

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WEAPONS; U.S. Says Iraqi Indicated Atom Project Is Continuing
By David E. Sanger
Dec. 10, 2002

The Bush administration today seized on an Iraqi general's admission over the weekend that his country had sought to build a nuclear weapon to argue that President Saddam Hussein had not given up his quest. At the same time, the administration conceded that it was reluctant to share with the United Nations some American-gathered intelligence about Iraqi arms programs.

Briefing reporters today, President Bush's spokesman, Ari Fleischer, said the comments on Sunday by Gen. Amir al-Saadi that ''we haven't reached the final assembly of a bomb, nor tested it,'' proved Iraq's intentions.

General Saadi appeared to be speaking about a project that he contends was cut off during the Persian Gulf war in 1991, but his use of a present tense created some doubt.

The International Atomic Energy Agency removed all the weapons-grade nuclear material it knew about from Iraq in 1994. But the agency noted in February 1999 that Iraq had never provided key technical documents from those projects, or said how it had obtained nuclear plans and materials.

Speaking just as the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies were receiving the 12,000 pages of Iraqi declarations about its weapons, Mr. Fleischer said the United States would take its time in assessing the Iraqi declaration. But he added:

''In terms of overall Iraqi statements, you need only look at the wistful way that leading Iraqi generals describe how close they came to getting nuclear weapons. That's why the United States is skeptical of Iraqi intentions.''

He added that the fact that Iraq ''now for the first time has publicly talked so openly about how much it yearned to get nuclear weapons and how potentially close they came, gives reasons to pause and recognize that Iraq is a threat.''

Yet Mr. Fleischer hewed close to the White House public line that the documents would be reviewed ''in a very thoughtful, thorough and complete way.'' American officials are clearly concerned, foreign diplomats here say, that they are not viewed by other members of the Security Council as immediately dismissive of the Iraqi declaration.

But when pressed, Mr. Fleischer added, ''The history of Iraq is unquestionably that they lie.''

Asked about complaints from United Nations inspectors that the United States had not provided it with much intelligence about where to look for Iraqi weapons programs, Mr. Fleischer said the United States would cooperate. But he put limits on that cooperation. ''We want to make sure that sources and methods are not compromised in any information that could be conveyed to the inspectors,'' he said.

The United States today began examining the first copy of the Iraqi declaration, and said it was sending copies, in turn, to Britain, France, China and Russia. The administration is calling in experts from many corners of the government to evaluate the declaration. The analysis, a senior administration official said, would be led by the C.I.A., but would also include the National Security Agency, the Department of Defense, the national laboratories and the National Security Council.

Within a week or two, officials said, the White House will begin to assemble the preliminary conclusions of those agencies. ''The decision,'' an official said, ''is how to respond to what we find. With our own intel? With the last findings of the United Nations inspectors?''

Mr. Fleischer's comments about the limits of the administration's willingness to turn over intelligence to the inspectors came as senior Pentagon and military officials assembled a list of surveillance and reconnaissance craft whose findings could be offered to the United Nations inspectors to assist in their work, officials said today.

American officials are expected to meet with members of the inspection team in coming days to discuss the possible assistance. No formal request has been received from the team, officials said, and no formal offer of help has been made.

Satellites and high-flying surveillance aircraft have been gathering intelligence for years over much of Iraq, and the Predator, a pilotless aerial vehicle, has been operating in the no-flight zone of southern Iraq in recent weeks, officials said.

Any of those tools conceivably could be put to use to help the weapons inspectors, one official said.

''We'll be having those discussions, probably this week,'' a Pentagon official said. ''It's still a question of them asking us. There has been no agreement.''
