

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE REGION; Internal Rift Dooms Arab League Plan to Help Avert a War by Pressing Iraq
By Susan Sachs
March 14, 2003

Arab efforts to press Saddam Hussein to disarm collapsed today under the weight of internal bickering and a brush-off from the Iraqi government.

A delegation of Arab League foreign ministers called off a planned trip to Baghdad after Syria, which initially said it would take part in the mission, dismissed it as an American ploy that would only help legitimize an attack on Iraq.

The final blow came early this morning, when Iraq sent a message to the league's headquarters here telling the ministers to stay home.

The aborted visit underlined the disarray in the organization, which has found itself relegated to the sidelines as the United Nations debates a possible war against one of the league's 22 members.

Arab leaders have publicly quarreled for weeks over Iraq. While they are united in opposing a war, they have failed to agree on how to exert influence on Iraq or the United States.

The smaller Persian Gulf nations, which have become the staging ground for American troops preparing for a possible strike on Iraq, have called on the Iraqi leader to resign and go into exile. Syria, which is run by a Soviet-style Baath Party similar to Iraq's, has called on Arab countries to expel American forces.

Other Arab states, like Saudi Arabia, have taken more equivocal positions, saying that exile would certainly resolve the Iraq crisis while officially opposing an attack on Iraq that is not sanctioned by the United Nations.

The Arab League has never been a model of harmony. But analysts in the region say that its internal confusion is a sign that the organization has reached a moment of truth, where the rifts between its member states can no longer be papered over by carefully worded but ineffective resolutions.

The authoritarian Arab governments, based so strongly on the rule of one man, have mixed feelings, on one hand opposing a war on Iraq and on the other taking practical steps to adjust to a new situation.

''They fear that regime change will shake up the situation, that they won't be able to contain it and they won't be able to hold onto power or the peaceful balance in their country,'' said Shafeeq Ghabra, a Kuwaiti political scientist. ''Stability is based on one person staying in power. It's the core of their fear and also the core of the weakness of the Arab League.''

Still, some Arab leaders have already decided that a war that will depose Mr. Hussein is inevitable, and they have started to consider what role their industries, contractors and laborers might play in a postwar Iraq.

The effort to organize a last-ditch plea to the Iraqi leader brought all the underlying disputes into play. The delegation was to include the foreign ministers of Bahrain, Lebanon and Tunisia. Egypt also volunteered to send its minister, as did Syria, which effectively controls Lebanon as a client state.

The combination proved fatal.

Bahrain, for example, has supported an initiative by the leader of the United Arab Emirates, Sheik Zayed bin Sultan Nahayan, that called on Mr. Hussein to resign and go into exile. Syria, on the other hand, has flatly rejected the idea.

Plans for the trip to Baghdad were almost finished when President Bashar al-Assad of Syria gave a speech before his country's Parliament that enraged Arab League officials.

In the speech, delivered Monday, Mr. Assad pointedly dismissed the league's attempt at diplomacy and portrayed Arab leaders as weaklings unable to defend their interests in the face of American pressure.

The delegation to Iraq, he said, would inevitably return without a commitment from Iraq that would be accepted by the United States.

''It would be said that Iraq has even rejected cooperation with the Arabs, so Iraq really does threaten its neighbors,'' Mr. Assad added. ''So we will become as an Arab summit, through this committee, promoters of war and we will give legitimacy for the war that will take place.''

Mr. Assad's speech, according to officials in Cairo, effectively derailed the Arab peace effort by tying the hands of Lebanese officials who were to go on the trip to Baghdad.

The final blow was the message today from Iraq to the Arab League saying that the trip should be postponed as a result of ''new developments regarding the American plotted aggression.''
