
VIGILANCE AND MEMORY: THE MILITARY; Move to Gulf By Key Unit Could Set Staff For Iraq War
By Michael R. Gordon and Eric Schmitt
Sept. 12, 2002

The United States Central Command is planning to send much of its staff to Qatar, in the Persian Gulf, in a move that Pentagon officials said would form the core of a battle staff that could run a war against Iraq.

About 600 officers under the command of Gen. Tommy R. Franks, about a quarter of his staff, will move to Qatar in November, military officials said. The purpose is to test the ability to deploy a headquarters rapidly in a crisis and to carry out a war game, the officials said.

But Pentagon officials said it was likely that the staff members would remain in the Persian Gulf after the exercise is complete and form the basis of a planning group for a military campaign against Iraq. General Franks is also planning to go to Qatar to take part in the exercise.

In essence, the American military is trying to put things in place so it has a running start in any campaign to oust Saddam Hussein.

The plans to move the battle staff follows repeated private entreaties by General Franks in recent months to shift his operations to the Persian Gulf region. Military officials said he had long been pushing to establish a forward command center.

President Bush convened a top-level meeting at the White House on Monday to discuss Iraq, and General Franks was there with Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

The Central Command headquarters is situated in Tampa, Fla., because Arab nations are uneasy about playing host to a major American command. But it is necessary to establish a forward command center to oversee a major military operation.

During the 1991 Persian Gulf war, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf established a forward headquarters in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. But relations with the Saudis are strained and they have made it clear that they would not welcome an expanded American presence. So the focus of interest has shifted to Qatar.

As a small nation in a volatile part of the world, Qatar has been willing to accept an expanded American presence even as the Saudis have become more resistant. The United States conducted air attacks from Qatar during its campaign to topple the Taliban in Afghanistan, but at that time the existence of the United States Air Force units there was considered a military secret.

Qatar did not officially decide to acknowledge the buildup of American forces until Vice President Dick Cheney visited Al Udeid Air Base there in March.

The United States is developing the base, establishing an air command center there. American war planes operate from the base, providing a backup in case the Saudis do not allow the American military to use one in Saudi Arabia.

The 15,000-foot runway at Al Udeid is the longest in the region. Still, new runways and parking ramps have been added. Hangers have been fortified to protect the American warplanes from bombing raids.

By moving much of General Franks's headquarters staff to the gulf, the United States will take an important step toward mounting a military campaign in Iraq.

Even the war game that the battle staff is scheduled to conduct, code-named Internal Look, is likely to be an important preparation. In 1990, shortly before Iraq invaded Kuwait, the Central Command conducted a war game that evaluated the ability to repel an attack by Iraq.

A spokesman for the Central Command said the United States had made no decisions beyond testing its ability to deploy a headquarters and conducting the war game. ''It is a command-post exercise which will test our command, control and communications,'' the spokesman said.

There are other signs of war preparation. Army equipment that was stored in Al Udeid was put on a ship and moved to Kuwait as part of the exercise, but the army secretary, Thomas White, said that it was a logistics exercise and that the equipment was moved back.

Most of General Franks's subordinate commanders have already moved their headquarters to the region to help fight the war in Afghanistan and prepare for a potential war in Iraq, among other contingencies. The Army has forward headquarters in Kuwait, the Marines in Bahrain and the Air Force has a headquarters in Saudi Arabia. The Navy has long had a headquarters in Bahrain.
