

THREATS AND RESPONSES: MONITORING; Iraq Says Its Scientists Have Refused Private Interviews by U.N. Weapons Inspectors
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 24, 2003

Iraqi scientists have refused to be interviewed in private by United Nations weapons inspectors, a top Iraqi official said tonight, apparently voiding for the moment a central demand of the inspectors and the Bush administration.

Unfettered access to the scientists is regarded as a major concern as the administration decides whether to carry through on a threat to attack Iraq. The issue has been one of the most contentious since inspections restarted here in November.

News of the scientists' refusal to talk came as the administration accused Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, of subverting access to the scientists by terrorizing them into silence, going beyond what it has said before. ''Today, we know from multiple sources that Saddam has ordered that any scientist who cooperates during interviews will be killed, as well as their families,'' Paul D. Wolfowitz, the American deputy defense secretary, said in speech in New York. ''Furthermore, we know that scientists are being tutored on what to say to the U.N. inspectors and that Iraqi intelligence officers are posing as scientists to be interviewed by the inspectors.''

On Monday, during a visit by the two chief United Nations inspectors, the Iraqi government assented to a 10-point package for greater cooperation -- and perhaps the most important point was that scientists would be ''encouraged'' to speak with inspectors outside the presence of Iraqi officials.

But tonight, Gen. Hussam Muhammad Amin, the top Iraqi liaison with the inspectors, said that all six scientists whom the United Nations inspectors had wanted to interview privately had refused, unless accompanied by a government ''minder'' or unless the interview was recorded.

He said that while the government will continue to encourage them, there was little more officials could do. ''How can we solve this?'' he asked at a weekly briefing to reporters. ''Should we put him in prison and say to him: 'Make an interview in private'? This is contrary with his rights and his human rights. This is unrequired indeed.''

This is a particularly delicate moment: Next Monday, the inspection team, headed by Hans Blix and Dr. Mohammad ElBaradei, who visited Baghdad earlier this week, will deliver a report to the United Nations Security Council on the inspections so far.

American officials say the report will be perhaps the final test of whether, in the Bush administration's view, Iraq is willing to cooperate with inspectors. The lack of private interviews may well count against the Iraqis if Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei determine not enough effort was exerted to encourage the interviews.

The news today about the scientists was but one indication of the frayed relations between the government and the inspectors. Iraq denies that it has weapons of mass destruction or programs to develop them, and the United Nations has praised the government for allowing access to any site it has requested, a change from the earlier round of inspections that ended in 1998.

But tension has still run high, particularly in recent days, as the Iraqi government appears to have stepped up its complaints.

The sides sparred today over a visit on Monday by five inspectors to the new Al Nida mosque in Baghdad -- a visit that a prominent cleric said was an affront to Muslims.

Yasuhiro Ueki, a United Nations spokesman in Baghdad, said at first that he was unaware of any visit to a mosque, but then today said that the inspectors had gone there as sightseers. ''They were not wearing their U.N. caps or U.N. armbands,'' Mr. Ueki said. ''It was purely a private visit. It was not something they planned. It just happened that they passed by and were invited inside.''

But General Amin rejected that explanation tonight, saying that it was an inspection for weapons. As proof, he said that they surveyed the mosque several times before going to the gate and asked ''irrelevant'' and ''strange'' questions about the mosque's construction and whether it had underground buildings.

''It was from a security point of view very dangerous to them,'' he said. ''They were lucky because there were not people inside the mosque. Because, you know, maybe some people would like to make some problems, they would physically direct an aggression to them or hit them.''
