

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Russia May Support New U.N. Efforts on Iraq
By Steven Lee Myers
Oct. 12, 2002

President Vladimir V. Putin said today that Russia was prepared to support new United Nations Security Council resolutions on Iraq, but only to strengthen the work of inspectors searching for its weapons programs and not to authorize the use of military force.

Making his most extensive remarks to date on the looming confrontation with Iraq, after meetings here with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, Mr. Putin said the most urgent issue was how to return inspectors to Iraq to verify that country's compliance with its commitments to dismantle nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs.

Mr. Putin, like others outside the United States, appears simply to disagree on the urgency of the threat that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq poses, despite impassioned warnings by President Bush and Mr. Blair. Today, he bluntly dismissed recent reports on the subject by Britain and the Central Intelligence Agency as ''propaganda'' to support already developed positions.

''Russia does not have in its possession any trustworthy data that would support the existence of nuclear weapons or any other weapons of mass destruction in Iraq,'' he said. ''And we have not received such information from our partners as yet.''

Mr. Putin noted that the Iraqi government and the director of the United Nations inspection team had already agreed on new inspections and said that those inspections should begin immediately under existing Council resolutions, though he was open to proposals to strengthen rules governing how the inspectors work.

''Russia insists the situation around Iraq should be settled on the basis of U.N. resolutions that were passed before,'' Mr. Putin said at a news conference with Mr. Blair, who arrived on Thursday evening, accompanied by his wife, Cherie, for a day and a half of talks with Mr. Putin at a hunting lodge north of Moscow.

Mr. Putin did not directly address the draft resolution prepared and circulated by the United States and Britain, but only hours after he spoke, a deputy foreign minister, Yuri Y. Fedotov, rejected it out of hand, saying it ''cannot be accepted as a basis for a future U.N. Security Council resolution on Iraq as it contains clearly unfulfillable demands.''

Mr. Putin's remarks made it clear that an intensive diplomatic effort -- including Mr. Blair's visit and a telephone call from Mr. Bush on Monday congratulating Mr. Putin on his 50th birthday -- has so far failed to persuade him to accept a tougher resolution warning Iraq of the consequences of noncompliance.

''Baghdad has made concessions and agreed to receive a U.N. commission without any conditions,'' Mr. Putin said, rebuffing the Bush administration's arguments. ''Bearing this in mind, we believe that there are no formal and legal reasons for adopting any new U.N. resolution.''

The hardening of Russia's position came a day after the House and Senate voted to give Mr. Bush the authority to use force in Iraq. That vote was criticized in Russia today as a provocation and a threat to global political and economic stability, underscoring the domestic pressure Mr. Putin faces over the issue.

Viktor A. Ozerov, chairman of the defense committee in the upper house of Parliament, said the vote ''can be regarded as a challenge to the world community that proves that the United States of America does not pay any attention to the norms of international law.''

In several weeks of international diplomacy -- and in an unusually broad public debate here in Russia -- the Russians have made it clear that they fear that the Bush administration's campaign to overthrow Mr. Hussein's government could threaten Russia's longstanding political and economic interests in Iraq. Those include $8 billion in Soviet-era debt Iraq owes and other contracts as well as extensive oil projects.

A British official described Mr. Blair's talks with Mr. Putin as cordial and productive. But today at the news conference, Mr. Blair acknowledged that he and Mr. Putin had ''different perspectives about how sure we can be about Iraq and weapons of mass destruction.''

Mr. Blair also argued for a unified position on the Security Council, saying that would be the most effective lever against Mr. Hussein. ''The stronger and clearer the signal the international community gives,'' he said, ''the less likely conflict will be.''
