

A NATION AT WAR: SOUTHERN IRAQ; Food Arrives, but Water Supplies Cause Worry
By Marc Santora
March 27, 2003

The first food convoy arrived at the Iraqi border town of Safwan today and, according to reports, was greeted by a panicked crowd that swarmed around the trucks, fighting for scraps.

There were reports that residents of Basra were drinking from putrid rivers, raising the specter of an outbreak of disease.

Hospitals in Baghdad were given plastic bags filled with water in case the power was knocked out.

After a week of war, efforts to bring aid to the people of Iraq remain stalled, and relief workers, as well as world leaders, are becoming increasingly worried about a crisis that could spiral out of control.

The United Nations will formally ask for more than $2 billion for assistance later this week, according to United Nations officials.

''I must say, I am getting increasingly concerned by humanitarian casualties in this conflict,'' Secretary General Kofi Annan said today.

The Bush administration is also moving to address concerns. In his budget proposal to Congress, President Bush has asked for $2.4 billion for aid and reconstruction.

''We have never spent this much money in one year in one country in the 40-year history of A.I.D.,'' said Andrew Natsios, the head of the Agency for International Development.

But money is not the main problem right now.

The most immediate concern remains the water shortage in Basra, Iraq's second largest city and home to 1.5 million people.

The city's main water treatment plant stopped working last Friday when power was knocked out. It remains unclear what caused the damage. The International Committee of the Red Cross has been working to repair the facility, but it remains severely damaged, working at about 50 percent capacity.

''As of this afternoon, we have managed only to establish a partial functioning treatment center,'' said Fouad Bawaba, a Red Cross spokesman. Engineers have still not been able to assess the damage to the high voltage power lines that feed the center, Mr. Bawaba said.

There are reports that the people in Basra are so desperate that they have begun drinking out of the rivers. Around 500,000 tons of raw sewage is dumped into Iraqi waterways every day, according to the United Nations. When allied bombing during the first Gulf war knocked out power in large sections of the country for months, the lack of clean water led to an outbreak of cholera.

While the situation in Basra seems dire, aid workers warned that there are other large cities where there is no information about the current conditions. Particularly, the heavy fighting reported in Najaf and Nasiriya has relief workers worried about what they might find there.

They say that much of the Bush administration's preparations were based on the assumption that the allied armies would be more warmly received than has been the case.

The severity of the crisis will be determined largely by how quickly workers can resume the elaborate system set up to distribute food under the United Nations- administered oil-for-food program. There are more than 40,000 distribution points in the country that are currently not working.

''The actual mechanism that is in place is one of the best mechanisms in the world for distributing food,'' said Regina Davis, the chief food officer for the disaster relief team designated by the Bush administration to speed the flow of aid.

Her team is in place in Kuwait but is still unable to go into southern Iraq to assess the situation.

Today, the Kuwaiti Red Crescent drove five trucks with 20 tons of food and water into the small town of Safwan just across the Iraqi border. Although only 5,000 people live in Safwan, the Kuwaitis were met with swarming masses of people grabbing at boxes and tearing them apart, fighting each other for anything they could grab. While accepting the food, they expressed the disdain for those who brought it, chanting that they would bleed for Saddam Hussein.

The United States military also brought a convoy of seven trucks filled with aid across the Iraqi border today to Umm Qasr, but it is being kept in storage. A ship carrying relief supplies from Britain, the Sir Galahad, is scheduled to dock at Umm Qasr on Thursday. Military officials would not speculate when the aid would begin moving.
