

Kerrey Debates His Students on Changing Iraqi Regime
By Robert F. Worth
Dec. 5, 2002

Two weeks ago, a group of students at New School University marched angrily into the offices of the university's president, Bob Kerrey, to demand that he address their complaints about his public call for regime change in Iraq.

Yesterday, they got what they asked for. Hundreds of students and faculty members packed a university auditorium on West 12th Street to hear a raucous, often bitter debate in which Mr. Kerrey was accused of betraying the New School's pacifist legacy and miring the school in controversy. As the hourlong debate -- in which Mr. Kerrey and a former United Nations official faced two students -- came to an end early yesterday afternoon, a group of students held up signs calling for Mr. Kerrey to resign.

Mr. Kerrey, who became the school's president early last year after more than a decade as a United States senator, refused. During an eight-minute opening statement and a lengthy question-and-answer session, he vigorously defended his views and his right to make them public, saying it was consistent with the university's history of openness and debate. In a line that drew loud applause, Mr. Kerrey said he did not want ''to set a precedent so this university begins to be led, like so many other universities in America, by presidents who are so concerned by fund-raising needs that they have no public opinion on anything that matters'' to ordinary people.

Mr. Kerrey's student critics demanded a public forum in which they could challenge him after learning that he had joined a well-connected group of current and former political figures called the Committee for the Liberation of Iraq. He has also written and spoken about his support for ousting Saddam Hussein.

At times, the debate bordered on chaos, with students groaning and shouting others down after questioners maligned Mr. Kerrey's ethics or changed the subject to his controversial record as a soldier in Vietnam.

''I was a little upset with how the forum turned into a Kerrey-bashing session,'' Joanne Strasser, a first-year graduate student in liberal studies, said after the debate ended.

Mr. Kerrey maintained his composure throughout, although he seemed angry several times and once chastised one of the two students debating him as being too closed-minded.

Many campuses across the country have become hotbeds of protest against a war with Iraq recently. But the New School's students have been especially active, in part because of Mr. Kerrey's public stand.

To Mr. Kerrey's critics, his advocacy for military engagement runs directly against the New School's tradition of pacifism and left-wing social theory. The university's graduate school became a refuge for European intellectuals during the Nazi era, including Hannah Arendt and Claude Lévi-Strauss.

''It is unacceptable to me that you use the name of this school'' in advocating for military action to oust Mr. Hussein, said Colin Walsh, one of the two students who debated Mr. Kerrey. He added that the school's founding scholars would have been outraged by Mr. Kerrey's position.

Another student argued that Mr. Kerrey and his peers on the Committee for the Liberation of Iraq were more interested in securing Iraqi oil reserves and ''world domination'' than in the suffering of the Iraqi people.

Mustapha Tlili, who sat on Mr. Kerrey's side of the table in the debate and is a fellow at the school's World Policy Institute, objected to the uniformly negative tone of the students' arguments. He said that Mr. Kerrey had played an important role in encouraging dialogue between Muslim figures and the West.

For his part, Mr. Kerrey argued that armed intervention had prevented additional violence from taking place in Bosnia, Cambodia and elsewhere.

Some students tried to link Mr. Kerrey's stand on Iraq to earlier controversies that have clouded his tenure as president. Last year, Mr. Kerrey was heavily criticized for his role in the massacre of a village by a platoon under his command during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Kerrey steered the discussion away from that and other questions about his tenure. But several students and faculty members said they were impressed with his performance.

''I think Kerrey was effective and the students were not,'' said Anwar Shaikh, a professor in the economics department who said he disagreed with Mr. Kerrey's views on Iraq.