

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 18, 2003; Defiance From Baghdad, Troops on the Move, and Security Warnings
By Anthony Depalma
March 19, 2003

As Saddam Hussein spurned President Bush's demand that he leave Iraq, American and British forces advanced toward the Iraqi frontier in a broad arc of mechanized firepower pointed at Baghdad, waiting for final orders to attack.

RESPONSE FROM BAGHDAD -- As expected, Mr. Hussein defiantly rejected the American ultimatum to flee or be forcibly removed from power by a coalition of troops from the United States, Britain and Australia. He met with officials and his two sons at undisclosed locations in Baghdad. Images from those meetings were broadcast in Iraq. He warned invading troops to expect a ''holy war,'' and predicted their defeat.

AT THE WHITE HOUSE -- President Bush met with top military advisers to review the final details of an invasion of Iraq that could begin at any time. Even the 48-hour deadline set by Mr. Bush on Monday might not determine when the fighting will start, White House officials said, because Mr. Hussein has already refused to leave. The final decision will take into account military readiness, weather conditions and last-minute efforts by Mr. Hussein to flee.

Officials stepped up preparations to safeguard the White House against terrorist attacks. All tours were canceled indefinitely, and pedestrians were barred from a segment of Pennsylvania Avenue.

SECURITY CONCERNS -- The nation returned to Code Level Orange after President Bush's speech Monday night. Security officials in several states said they would not deploy National Guard troops as Washington has directed unless the federal government helps pay the bill.

WARNING OF 'SLEEPER' ATTACKS -- The F.B.I. warned state and local law enforcement officials to be on the lookout for attacks by Iraqi sleeper agents who might be activated after the start of an American invasion.

ANTI-WAR STRATEGIES -- Americans opposed to a military invasion of Iraq are divided over how best to express their opposition. One segment favors acts of civil disobedience while others fear that disruptions during military operations might be seen as disloyal, alienating the public.

WORLD REACTION -- President Bush's stark ultimatum to Mr. Hussein deepened the fissure between America and some of its European allies. The leaders of France and Germany, who have been openly critical of Mr. Bush's actions, condemned his move toward war. President Jacques Chirac of France said there was ''no justification'' for the use of force. Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany said that President Bush's decision would mean ''certain death to thousands of innocent men, women and children.''

BLAIR WINS VOTE -- Following a charged Parliamentary debate in which Prime Minister Tony Blair passionately defended his support of the United States and President Bush, a motion opposing the war in Iraq was defeated. It was a bruising victory for Mr. Blair, who watched 139 of 410 Labor Members of Parliament vote against him. Earlier in the day, two more members of the government resigned, bringing to three the number of defections from Mr. Blair's party protesting his stand on Iraq.

SECOND CHANCE IN TURKEY -- Turkish government officials said that Parliament may vote again on Wednesday or Thursday on whether to lend crucial support to an American invasion of Iraq. Earlier this month, the Turkish Parliament narrowly rejected a resolution giving permission for American troops to use southeastern Turkey as a staging area, spoiling plans to open a second front. The new resolution might give the Allies access to Turkish air space, but not allow them to assemble troops inside Turkey.

PALESTINIAN VOTE -- Following a stormy meeting, Yasir Arafat ended his attempts to significantly reduce the powers of a new Palestinian prime minister. Parliament then voted to create the position, empowering it with authority to form a government without Mr. Arafat's approval. The action significantly advanced President Bush's ''road map'' for peace in a post-Saddam Middle East. Last week Mr. Bush said he would support a plan to create a Palestinian state after real power was shifted from Mr. Arafat to a Palestinian prime minister.

SPORTS UNCERTAINTY -- Because of worries over the impending war, Major League Baseball canceled a season opener in Japan on Tuesday between the Seattle Mariners and the Oakland Athletics. But the first rounds of the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament will start, as scheduled, on Thursday. ANTHONY DePALMA
