

A NATION AT WAR: THE PENTAGON; Rumsfeld Cautions Iran and Syria On Aid to Iraq
By David E. Sanger and Eric Schmitt
March 29, 2003

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld accused Syria and Iran today of interfering with the American war effort in Iraq.

He said he would hold the Syrian government accountable, the first time anyone in the administration has suggested that the confrontation could be broadened to include states that could be aiding the Iraqi forces.

There was no immediate response from Iran, but in Damascus the reaction to Mr. Rumsfeld's comments was swift. A senior Syrian Foreign Ministry official, while not denying the American assertions, denied that Mr. Rumsfeld was engaged in ''an attempt to cover up what his forces are doing against civilians in Iraq, which are a violation of the principles of international humanitarian law.''

Mr. Rumsfeld's comments, at a Pentagon briefing, seemed to take White House officials by surprise, but more for their timing than their content.

Several senior administration officials said they were pleased that Mr. Rumsfeld had challenged the two countries so directly, particularly Syria, which, according to the administration, has transferred night-vision goggles and other military equipment to Saddam Hussein's forces. The goggles were originally manufactured in Russia, the White House says.

In his opening remarks, Mr. Rumsfeld said the United States considered ''such trafficking as hostile acts and would hold the Syrian government accountable.''

He would not say whether the United States would consider military action if the shipments continued, but his language was parallel to the language he and others used several months ago about Iraq.

''I don't think you'll hear the president upbraiding Rumsfeld for what he said,'' one senior administration official said tonight. ''He gave public voice to something that has been talked about around here for a week.''

At the same time, Mr. Rumsfeld warned Iran to rein in the Badr Corps, a unit of several hundred Iraqis trained, equipped and financed by Iran's Revolutionary Guard. In recent days they have crossed into Iraq and could pose a threat to American-led troops in Iraq, and to postwar stability there.

Mr. Rumsfeld warned Tehran that the United States would treat the fighters as combatants. Mr. Rumsfeld said the Badr Corps had not yet interfered with coalition operations, and one senior defense official said the secretary's comments were ''a warning shot'' to Tehran.

Mr. Rumsfeld said: ''The issue is that General Franks and the coalition countries are busy, they've got a complicated task. We would prefer it not be made more difficult by any of the neighbors.''

The Syrian Foreign Ministry official said, ''After the failure of his claims of a quick and clear victory, Rumsfeld is trying to justify the failure of his forces, either due to the weather or by accusing others of smuggling equipment into Iraq.

''The invading forces, which are launching a blatant aggression against the Iraqi people, have not registered any accomplishments to date except demolishing civilian facilities and housing, shelling markets, hospitals, museums, food warehouses, busses and ambulances,'' he added.

Mr. Rumsfeld's statements not only took Syria by surprise but seemed to stun some at the Pentagon, who have never seemed to become accustomed to the fact that the defense secretary knows how to make headlines.

''I was surprised,'' said one senior military official.

So was the White House. ''It's fair to say he didn't tell us this was coming,'' said one official. ''Then again, he rarely does.''

President Bush made no mention of the actions of Iraq's neighbors when he spoke this afternoon to veterans of previous wars in the East Room of the White House.

But he seemed to address other countries in the region -- and perhaps North Korea -- when he said that in the confrontation with Iraq, ''We are sending a clear signal to the world that we will not submit to a future in which dictators and terrorists can arm and threaten the peace without consequence.''

Mr. Rumsfeld refused to be drawn into a discussion of what his comments could mean, an ambiguity that senior aides said later was meant to keep the Damascus government guessing.

''I'm saying exactly what I said,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''It was carefully phrased. There's no question but that to the extent military supplies or equipment or people move across borders between Iraq and Syria, that it vastly complicates our situation.''
