

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ENERGY INDUSTRY; Iraq Cancels Oil Contract With 3 Russian Companies
By Steven Lee Myers
Dec. 13, 2002

Iraq abruptly canceled a contract with Russia's largest oil company and two other Russian companies to develop a major Iraqi oil field.

Iraq's decision -- announced in a letter to the company, Lukoil, on Monday -- amounted to a rebuff to Russia, one of Baghdad's strongest supporters at a time when the United States is threatening to go to war over what the Bush administration says is President Saddam Hussein's pursuit of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons.

Russia, one of the five permanent members on the United Nations Security Council, has economic and political ties to Iraq dating to the Soviet era. It was not immediately clear why, at such a sensitive juncture, Iraq would choose to move against Russia's economic interests there.

In recent months, President Vladimir V. Putin has joined the United States and others in pressing Mr. Hussein to cooperate with the renewed inspections of its weapons programs, even though Mr. Putin has repeatedly voiced opposition to any American military action against Iraq.

Lukoil signed a $3.8 billion contract to develop Iraq's West Qurna oil field in 1997 as part of a consortium of Russian companies that includes Zarubezhneft and Machinoimport. Under the contract, Lukoil controlled 68.5 percent of the stakes in the deal, with the rest divided between the two other companies.

The deal, however, has remained largely symbolic since significant work on the field -- with an estimated potential of producing half a million barrels of oil a day -- has been stymied by the United Nations sanctions imposed on Iraq following its invasion of Kuwait in 1990.

A Lukoil spokesman, Mikhail Z. Mikhailov, criticized the decision tonight, saying the three Russian companies had been caught off guard. He said it was delivered in a letter sent to the company's representatives in Iraq by a vice minister of the Iraqi oil agency.

''We are really surprised, as the cancellation was signed by a vice oil minister when the Iraqi Parliament approved and ratified this deal,'' Mr. Mikhailov said.

There was no immediate reaction by the Russian government today, a holiday on which government agencies were closed. Iraq's ambassador to Russia, Abbas Khalaf, who has been a strong promoter of economic ties between the two countries, declined to comment.

Reuters reported that the Iraqi oil minister, Rashid Muhammad al-Ubaydi, attending an OPEC meeting in Vienna today, said simply that Iraq expected companies to fulfill their contractual obligations.

''Any company that does not fulfill their obligation over a long time, then we will be free to cancel their contract,'' Reuters quoted him as saying. ''That is the policy.''

Russia has direct financial interests in Iraq, including about $7.6 billion in debts that Iraq ran up with the Soviet Union that have not yet been paid. Russian companies, including Lukoil, have been among the largest recipients of contracts allowed by the United Nations' oil-for-food programs, which permits Iraq some trade for essential goods.

Russia's financial stake in Iraq has become part of the diplomatic maneuvering over the Bush administration's insistence on a tough stance against Mr. Hussein. Although American officials have repeatedly said they would not offer concrete assurances that Russian companies' contracts would be guaranteed if Mr. Hussein is overthrown, President Bush said last month that the United States understood Russia's interests.

''Of course, these interests will be taken into account,'' he said in an interview on Russian television last month before meeting Mr. Putin.

Iraq has complained previously about Lukoil's deal, threatening in 2000 and again last year to cancel the contract.

Raad Al Kadiri, an analyst with PFC Energy in Washington, said that Iraq had grown increasingly frustrated with Lukoil's apparent unwillingness to begin developing Al Qurna's potential riches.

''They were eager to get Lukoil to begin at least preliminary exploration,'' Mr. Kadiri said in a telephone interview from Vienna, where he was attending the OPEC meeting. ''This decision won't be seen in isolation. It obviously has political motivations.''

Russia, he noted, had joined the United States not only in demanding the renewed inspections in Iraq, but also in rewriting the provisions of the oil-for-food program and limiting the items Iraq was allowed to import.

''I don't think Russia's foreign policy has helped Lukoil very much,'' he added.
