

THREATS AND RESPONSES: PREPARATIONS; Some U.S. Forces in Northern Iraq, Military Chief Says
By Eric Schmitt
Jan. 30, 2003

Small numbers of American military forces are now operating in northern Iraq, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff acknowledged today.

Over the past several weeks, Special Operations Forces have entered the Kurdish areas of northern Iraq to work with teams of Central Intelligence Agency operatives who are organizing Kurdish opposition groups, military officials said today.

One Pentagon official said that numbers were ''very small,'' probably less than two dozen. But the importance of the troops' deployment lies less in their numbers than in their presence, which represents a further buildup of American forces in the region.

It has been known for months that Central Intelligence Agency operatives have been in northern Iraq, which is controlled by the two main Kurdish groups under the protection of the United States and Britain, which maintain a no-flight zone over the area. The American intelligence agents have been trying to organize Kurdish guerrillas who could act as guides, interpreters or scouts for American-led forces in any northern offensive. There have also been reports that C.I.A. operatives are working in other parts of Iraq in preparation for a possible war.

But until today, military officials have refused to comment publicly on periodic reports of American troops slipping in and out of the area. When asked about the matter at a Pentagon news conference, Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs, told reporters: ''I don't think we want to get into where our forces are right now, but there are not significant military forces in northern Iraq right now.''

While some military officials said that General Myers's remarks were inadvertent, other officials said they were part of the Bush administration's continuing effort to increase pressure on Saddam Hussein to comply with the United Nations demand to disarm.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, elaborating on a possible American role in arranging for exile for Mr. Hussein, said today that the United States ''would, I'm sure, try to help find a place'' for Mr. Hussein, his family and other Iraqi leaders if they chose flight instead of war.

Later, the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said that exile was simply ''one of those ideas that's floating out there'' and not a ''serious policy'' or something that had ''been approached with any serious discussion.''

An Iraqi opposition official said that three United States aircraft landed earlier this week in northern Iraq at Hurrayah airfield, near Shaklawa, on a major road from Iran into Iraq. The official said that people were seen unloading containers and cargo, and appeared to be setting up a base.

General Myers said he was not aware of the report, adding, ''I'm not going to go into any more detail on that.''

In another sign of the nation's preparations for war, the Coast Guard said today that it was sending eight high-speed cutters and 600 personnel to the Persian Gulf region in the service's first combat deployment since the Vietnam War. Coast Guard cutters played a support role in the Grenada, Haiti and Kosovo operations, officials said.

The ships' mission will be to protect ''high value targets'' such as Navy ships, oil tankers and military command vessels, as well as to prevent suicide bomb attacks, said Cmdr. James B. McPherson, a Coast Guard spokesman. The cutters carry 50-caliber machine guns and 20-millimeter chain guns.

Four of the 110-foot, high-speed vessels, which carry 15-member crews, left Norfolk, Va., today, bound for the Persian Gulf. The other four ships, which will leave Norfolk in a few days, will patrol Turkish waters near ports that American military cargo ships will use, if basing arrangements can be worked out with the Turkish government.

In addition to the cutters, the Coast Guard will deploy four, 115-member port security units to the gulf region, Commander McPherson said. These specialists, who travel in 30-foot Boston Whalers, guard piers and waterways.

The Coast Guard will assign reserve and voluntary auxiliary personnel to perform the domestic missions of drug- and law-enforcement and search-and-rescue missions that the cutters normally perform, Commander McPherson said.

Finally, the Pentagon also announced that about 16,000 more reservists were called to active duty in the past week, bringing the total to nearly 95,000.
