

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraqi Leaders Vent at U.N., But Are Open To Its Terms
By Neil MacFarquhar
Nov. 12, 2002

The Iraqi Parliament, called into special session in Baghdad by Saddam Hussein to debate the United Nations resolution on resuming weapons inspections, spent most of the session today heaping scorn on the idea, but outright rejection seemed unlikely.

The discussion was extended into a second day, with the requested recommendation to the Revolutionary Command Council, or cabinet, now scheduled to be delivered on Tuesday. Although the defiant tenor of the discussion was likely to continue, ultimately Parliament was expected to follow its past practice and produce some kind of face-saving formula that would free the Iraqi leader to acquiesce to the United Nations demands that he, too, has derided.

Iraq has until Friday to declare that it intends to comply fully with the terms of the resolution.

Some hint of what is to come was contained in the talks, which were broadcast live on Iraqi satellite television. Salem al-Qubaissi, chairman of Parliament's Arab and international relations committee, said the committee would recommend rejecting United Nations Security Council Resolution 1441 as tyrannical.

''International relations have deteriorated to the point where the evil American administration shamelessly announces plans to invade and occupy Iraq by force, to change the map of the region and rob it of its resources by force,'' Mr. Qubaissi said, before stressing that Parliament would support whatever the Iraqi leader believed was best.

''We are convinced of the ability of the Iraqi leader, this fighter, mujaheed, this man of values, of unlimited wisdom, of extraordinary ability to measure events, of sharp vision, of courage in running the struggle and leading the confrontation, of devotion in leading the Iraqi people to safety on the secure side of the sea where the sunny future lies,'' the committee chairman said.

''The committee also recommends asking the political leadership to take whatever steps are necessary to defend Iraq, its pride and dignity and to authorize the leader Saddam Hussein to do whatever he sees as necessary,'' he said.

Mr. Hussein has in recent weeks being trying to present his government as more democratic -- at least in form. He staged a referendum on his leadership, which he won with 100 percent of the vote. He stunned the nation by opening the prison gates last month, allowing virtually all prisoners to go free. Calling the assembly session on this issue adds to that aura.

If there were any doubt about whose vote counts the most in this particular assembly, however, the wall at the front is dominated by a large sepia print of the Iraqi leader.

The Parliament speaker, Saadoun Hammadi, also concluded that the assembly would leave it to Mr. Hussein to decide what to do.

Iraq's likely acceptance of the United Nations resolution was also considered a foregone conclusion because of the attitude of other countries in the region. The foreign ministers of the Arab League, meeting in Cairo on Sunday, said accepting the inspections was the best way to avoid yet another war in the region.

The fact that Iraq is being pushed by the Arab world to accept the resolution -- as well as by states like Russia and France with which Iraq has sought to forge ties -- left Baghdad little room to maneuver.

Many senior Iraqi officials were already anticipating that arms inspections would be getting under way for the first time since 1998, warning that the new inspectors should not adopt the kind of provocative attitude that led to so many crises in the past.

Not all the comments in the Iraqi Parliament were entirely negative. One speaker addressing the assembly tried to explain the Security Council vote on Friday by noting that some countries had worked to dilute the harsh resolution first proposed by the United States.

''The core of the decision did not change, but it added some indication of respect for Iraq's sovereignty and integrity,'' said Saed al-Moussawi, the director of the international organizations department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He interpreted the resolution to say that once weapons inspections were concluded, the United Nations sanctions imposed against Iraq in 1990 would be lifted, even though the reference to the sanctions in the text is oblique.
