

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ATLANTIC PARTNERS; NATO Chief Urges Allies Not to Let Iraq Divide Them
By Steven Erlanger
Sept. 26, 2002

The NATO secretary general, Lord Robertson, urged the Western allies today not to let disputes over Iraq weaken their unity and strengthen their enemies.

''There is a huge premium on alliance unity, especially in these dangerous times,'' Lord Robertson said at the close of a two-day conference of NATO defense ministers in Warsaw. ''The enemies of the alliance are watching very carefully indeed.''

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said he was pleased with the level of support he found among allies for his idea of a NATO rapid-reaction force and for the need to take the risks of Iraq seriously.

Mr. Rumsfeld also cautioned his Russian counterpart, Sergei B. Ivanov, to respect the sovereignty of Georgia as Moscow tries to defeat Chechen rebels, whom it regards as terrorists. He urged Russia, which says the rebels fight from bases in Georgia, to work closely with Georgia ''to deal effectively with what is really a serious problem,'' but he said Washington would oppose Russia's bombing of Georgian territory.

The Americans, including the deputy director of central intelligence, John McLaughlin, presented a 40-minute classified briefing on Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear weapons programs, including its effort to build new missiles.

Mr. Rumsfeld deflected questions about any offers of military support by saying President Bush had not decided what to do in Iraq. ''Therefore, one ought not to be surprised that there isn't a coalition,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''But you can be certain that if and when the president decides to do something, that there'll be other nations assisting,'' he added, saying some European colleagues, whom he refused to name, had expressed support.

The German defense minister, Peter Struck, made it clear that Germany was not among them, and would not take part in any war in Iraq. In Moscow the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, denounced the ''propaganda furor'' over Iraq.

Mr. Struck said that he found nothing new in the information presented to the ministers about Iraq and that there was no evidence pinning down links between Baghdad and Al Qaeda. ''Our priority is to enable quick inspections on the ground in Iraq,'' he said. ''I got the impression there is understanding and also some support for our position.''

Mr. Rumsfeld denied he had snubbed Mr. Struck, whom he had referred to at one point as ''that person,'' by leaving a NATO meeting Tuesday night just before the German was to speak. ''No, I did not intentionally snub anybody,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''That's not my way.''

But when asked what more Berlin might do to mend fences with the Americans, he said, ''It's not for me to give advice to other countries.''

He then paused, adding: ''We do have a saying in America: If you're in a hole, stop digging.'' He paused again, then, almost giggling, said: ''Um, I'm not sure I should have said that. Let's pretend I never said that.''

Mr. Struck refused to comment on the jibe in his own news conference, saying only, ''German-U.S. relations are in a difficult period, but I think that we will return soon to a good working atmosphere and relations of friendship.''

To that end, the German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, is planning a trip to Washington next week, German and American officials said.

Uwe-Karsten Heye, the spokesman for Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, told reporters that the Germans would work patiently to remove tensions. ''We accept that irritations exist,'' he said. ''They exist and have to be mended.''

The British prime minister, Tony Blair, tried to help the process along by inviting his fellow social democrat, Mr. Schröder, to a dinner Tuesday evening in London. Mr. Blair also withheld his government's report on Iraq's weapons program until the German election on Sunday was over.

At his daily briefing on Tuesday, the White House spokesman, Ari Fleisher, said Washington would continue to work with Berlin. ''But nobody should be under illusions or mistakes that now that the election is over, that everything goes back to the way it was,'' he said. ''That's not the natural result of the manner in which that campaign was waged. And I think that's plain for everybody to know and see.''
