

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 17, 2003; Diplomatic Impasse, a U.S. Ultimatum to Iraq, and Civilian Fears
By Anthony Depalma
March 18, 2003

The day began with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell declaring that diplomatic efforts to end the crisis in Iraq were dead. As the extraordinary day neared its end, President Bush gave Saddam Hussein an ultimatum -- leave Iraq in 48 hours or face war. Over the course of the day it became apparent that whether the Iraqi president stays to fight or leaves, American and British troops will invade the country soon.

ULTIMATUM FROM BUSH -- In a televised address to the nation, and to the people of Iraq, President Bush said the Iraqi crisis had reached the ''final days of decision.'' He gave Mr. Hussein and his sons 48 hours to leave Iraq. If they refuse, Mr. Bush said, American and British forces massing at the border will wage war ''at a time of our choosing.'' He cited the cease-fire agreement ending the 1991 Gulf War and United Nations Resolution 1441 last year as the legal foundations for the decision to attack. Speaking directly to Iraq's people and its troops, Mr. Bush vowed that ''the tyrant will soon be gone,'' and cautioned against fighting for ''a dying regime.'' Homeland security forces in the United States will be put on heightened alert, as Coast Guard patrols are increased and airport security broadened in anticipation of terror attacks that Mr. Bush said were possible but not inevitable.

DISARRAY IN BRITAIN -- Prime Minister Tony Blair's inner circle came under increasing strain. Robin Cook, a Parliamentary leader and former foreign secretary, resigned in protest of Mr. Blair's decision to side diplomatically and militarily with the United States. At the United Nations, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British ambassador, formally announced that the Security Council resolution proposed by the United States, Britain and Spain authorizing force against Iraq was withdrawn. He laid the blame for the diplomatic deadlock at the feet of the French government.

OCCUPATION FORCE -- Even if Mr. Hussein defies all expectations and flees Baghdad, it is virtually assured that allied troops will enter Iraq anyway, American officials said. They asserted that the invading forces will be needed to search for chemical and biological weapons. They also will act as a police force to keep the streets of Baghdad and other cities from erupting into chaos as a new regime is erected. Details of the plan are still secret, but Mr. Powell tipped his hand when he said that Mr. Hussein's departure, were it to come, would allow the crisis to be resolved ''through the peaceful entry of force.''
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
INITIAL OBJECTIVE -- One of the first objectives of the war is expected to be the southern city of Basra, situated in one of Iraq's major oil-producing regions and a hotbed of insurrection against Mr. Hussein after the 1991 Persian Gulf War. Allied officials hope Basra's mostly Shiite population will welcome troops as liberators, providing positive preliminary images that could sway world opinion in favor of the invasion. Leaflets will be dropped on the city urging people not to resist. But Mr. Hussein placed a member of his inner circle in charge of Basra's defense. That man, popularly known as ''Chemical Ali,'' was accused of carrying out Mr. Hussein's orders to use mustard gas and nerve agents against the Kurds in 1988.

KURDS SEEK SAFETY -- Several thousand Kurdish civilians fled cities in northern Iraq. They piled grandparents, children and belongings onto tractors and trailers, then headed away from Iraqi troops. Those who could not leave or who refused to flee stormed local supply stores to buy plastic sheeting to seal their homes against chemical or biological agents. In Baghdad, civilians braced for war.

RELIEF AND FEAR -- Around the United States, anxious Americans who have spent the last month wondering what was going to happen in Iraq voiced relief at knowing that the long debate was ending. But they displayed little of the cockiness expressed at the outset of the Gulf War. Instead, bravado was replaced by fear about what an invasion portends both at home and abroad. Jim Chamberlain, an electrician from Douglasville, Ga., said ''it's a lot more scary this time.'' ANTHONY DePALMA
