

As Divided as the U.N., the City Council Goes on Record Against an Iraq War, for Now
By Nichole M. Christian
March 13, 2003

With the world looking on, or much of its news media anyway, the New York City Council at long last took a stand yesterday on war with Iraq, although there was disagreement about what that stand was.

The language was carefully hedged, saying that the Council ''opposes a pre-emptive military attack on Iraq unless it is demonstrated that Iraq poses a real and imminent threat to the security and safety of the United States or its allies, or unless all other options for achieving compliance with the United Nations resolutions calling for the elimination of weapons of mass destruction and the means for their development have failed.''

With 31 members supporting and 17 opposing a revised version of a resolution first introduced in October, the Council's agonizing raged on. The author of the original resolution, Bill Perkins of Manhattan, said it was an antiwar statement. ''Whether this Council likes it or not, New York City is on the side of peace, and the whole world knows it,'' he said.

But Speaker Gifford Miller, who opposed the original language and supported the current version, called it an ''antiwar right now'' resolution.
Sign up for the New York Today Newsletter
Each morning, get the latest on New York businesses, arts, sports, dining, style and more.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
For an hour yesterday, City Hall looked a bit like the United Nations, as the glare of TV cameras from CNN and networks in Japan, Germany, Spain and France seized on every word of local politicians more used to discussing trash pickups and parking regulations than foreign policy.

Perhaps because of the cameras or just the subject itself, Council members delved deep into their personal lives and beliefs to defend their views. Some invoked Churchill, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Neville Chamberlain.

''This is a tough speech, first because I always regret the feeling of having to burn my antiwar draft card,'' said Councilman Lewis A. Fidler, Democrat of Brooklyn, as he explained his vote against the measure. ''I know that many of the people sitting in the gallery who are about to boo me probably marched with me against the war in Vietnam.''

Councilman Fidler said the 9/11 terror attack left him little choice. ''We are sitting today in what should be the shadows of the World Trade Center,'' he said. ''I don't want to be back here in six months naming streets for dead New Yorkers because this country did nothing.''

Though the resolution stands little chance of influencing the ongoing debate, supporters said New York City's voice needed to heard. At least 139 cities have already approved antiwar resolutions of some kind.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
''We are saying to the president today, you can no longer use 9/11 as an excuse for war,'' said Councilman Charles Barron, a Brooklyn Democrat. ''There was no linkage of Saddam Hussein to 9/11; there was no linkage of Saddam Hussein to Al Qaeda.''

But some said the resolution was troubling. ''I do not believe the City Council should be conducting national security policy,'' said Michael E. McMahon, a Staten Island Democrat. He added that the killings of two police detectives this week ''was a painful reminder that there are men and women putting their lives on the line to protect us at home and abroad.''

''We must not and should not risk sending the wrong message to those men and women who wear an American uniform,'' he said.

He added, ''You can hear in the debate this afternoon, we are not even sure what the message of this resolution is. ''

Councilwoman Yvette D. Clark of Brooklyn said she believed it was President George Bush who is sending the wrong message. ''If we're going to be looking for a fight,'' he said, ''let's fight poverty, let's fight firehouse closures, let's fight racism and sexism.''

The Council is overwhelmingly Democratic, and the three Republicans voted no. ''For our friends out there in the country who are watching this, we should sort of sanitize the record when we talk about consensus in this body,'' said James S. Oddo, the Republican leader. The division among the Democrats, he said, ''indicates that there is a wee bit less than consensus in this body.'' He added that members spent more time on this than the property tax increase last fall.
