

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Scientist Gives Inspectors First Private Talk
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 7, 2003

Under closer threat of war, Iraq bent today to a central demand of the United Nations weapons inspectors by saying one of its scientists agreed to be interviewed in private, without a government witness at his side.

The interview itself, which took place tonight at a hotel here in Baghdad, seemed less significant on its own than as a possible sign that Iraq was feeling deep pressure and might make concessions to stave off an attack by the United States.

Baghdad offered up the scientist, identified as Sinan Abdul Hassan, who was involved in the nation's biological weapons program, one day after Secretary of State Colin L. Powell made the case to the Security Council that Iraq still has weapons of mass destruction and two days before another last-minute visit here by the two chief United Nations weapons inspectors.

A senior United Nations official here said tonight that if Baghdad was serious about cooperating fully, it would probably also concede on two other crucial points this weekend: allowing surveillance of Iraq by U-2 spy planes and progress on internal legislation for the longer-term presence of inspectors here.

But with President Bush saying war may be only weeks away, the official expressed hope that Iraq might feel squeezed into offering some concrete proof that it has no weapons of mass destruction.

''The big thing is coming on Saturday,'' said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''Hopefully we will see what sort of fish is in the pond.''

In announcing the private interview, Gen. Amir al-Saadi, the top science advisor to Saddam Hussein, acknowledged that the scientist had agreed because of ''the circumstances that are present and the tension.''

More than 20 Iraqi scientists previously refused to be interviewed in private, despite an agreement reached here late last month with Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the two chief United Nations inspectors, that Iraq would ''encourage'' the scientists to do so.

Iraq had argued that it could not force the scientists to speak in private, and General Saadi stressed that the decision today had been made by the scientist alone. American officials have said the scientists have been threatened not to speak with inspectors alone. The general said he expected others to volunteer.

''It is people coming to us seeing that this question has become like a measure of Iraq's cooperation and that Iraq is play acting or something, that it is not encouraging people to go forth and be interviewed,'' General Saadi said in a news conference tonight devoted mostly to a detailed rebuttal of Mr. Powell's allegations against Iraq on Wednesday.

The United Nations official here said an Iraqi official called today and ''suggested'' a private interview with the scientist, who is among those who had earlier refused and is reportedly also a member of the government group assigned to monitor the inspectors on their visits. He was interviewed for about 3 hours and 20 minutes.

''The importance of this particular interview is they finally started giving in on something under the pressure that was put on them,'' the official said. ''We don't know if this is just one attempt and after this we will get stuck again or this is a precedent.''

A diplomatic noose of sorts has slowly tightened around Iraq since Mr. Blix delivered his report last month to the Security Council that was largely negative in its assessment of Iraq's overall cooperation with the inspectors.

Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei are to report again on Feb. 14,

''We hope at this late hour,'' Mr. Blix said today in London after meeting with Prime Minister Tony Blair, ''that they will come to a positive response. If they do not do that, then our report next Friday will not be what we would like it to be.''

General Saadi said tonight that Iraq had been surprised by Mr. Blix's last report. ''We hope he won't spring another surprise on us the next time when he gives his report on the 14th,'' he said. ''And we will engage him into dialogue to help clarify his misgivings and why he is holding such extreme views.''
