

A NATION AT WAR: JORDAN; Displaying Solidarity, Many Iraqis Go Home
By Ian Fisher
March 26, 2003

The kebab maker who hated Saddam Hussein returned to Iraq three days ago to fight America, his friends say. A waiter at the stand unrolled a poster of Mr. Hussein's stern face and kissed it. Muhammad Ali, 35, an Iraqi who makes the tea, said today he wanted to go back to Baghdad, also to fight the Americans.

''Before the war, we used to say we were against Saddam,'' Mr. Ali said as the cold flutters of an early spring snow fell at a bus depot in poor east Amman, packed with Iraqi-owned shops. ''But the moment the attack happened, we were with Saddam. We hope that God will give him victory.''

Something unexpected is happening here in Iraq's neighbor to the west, evident first in numbers: about 4,330 Iraqis have returned in the last 10 days, officials here say, a kind of reverse refugee flow from safety in Jordan to their now very violent homeland. (No refugees have crossed into Jordan, unlike the million or so who did so in the Persian Gulf war in 1991).

And many Iraqis here -- mostly Shiite Muslims who complained about their bad treatment under Mr. Hussein's Sunni-dominated government -- are now saying they are against the war, will fight American troops and, perhaps most surprisingly, now side with the man they once called their oppressor.

Some Iraqis who stayed behind say this new bellicose talk is as blustery as the winter winds here today. ''They are only going back to help their families,'' said a young Iraqi barber next to the kebab shop.

Either way, the war has churned complex emotions among the 380,000 Iraqis who live in Jordan -- most of them poor and often harassed by the Jordanian government, which does not want them here.

Part of it seems to be real anger at the images they have seen on television: of American tanks rolling past their homes and of women and children -- though they admit casualties have been relatively few -- killed or injured in the bombing.

''They say their missiles are 99 percent precise,'' said Muhammad Shraib, 36, a computer programmer from Mosul, a northern Iraqi city. ''But what we see on TV is that they are also killing civilians. What we see on TV -- a little girl with her head blown off -- we will never forgive them for that.''

There is also a sense of pride in Iraq as a nation, which seems to trump hatred of Mr. Hussein, as well as worries that the Americans and British are more interested in Iraq's oil wealth than in liberating Iraq.

''I watch all the television channels, and I know that the Americans and British have very good technology,'' said Adel Abdil Hassan, 31, in a tea shop where a television on top of a refrigerator was tuned to Al Jazeera, the Arab news channel. ''But Iraq is still resisting. The people are resisting to defend Iraq because of Iraq, not because of Saddam Hussein.''

Every morning, hundreds of Iraqis pile into buses and taxis from east Amman heading back home, though the flow is less in recent days, as it has become more difficult to cross the border. At one rundown apartment block in the Ragdan neighborhood in east Amman, all but about 5 of the 35 Iraqis who lived there left to go home, with many saying they wanted to fight American troops.

With so many gone, Ali Odeh, 40, who imports Iraqi dates, sat alone in his chilly room in the building, saying he stayed behind because he supports the war to rid Iraq of Mr. Hussein. He said he doubted that all who left would really fight. His friends, he said, were hedging their bets, not convinced from what they saw on television that America would actually win.

''I hoped America could defeat Saddam in three days,'' he said. ''I thought this would be a quick war. What happened?

''The people are now reacting, saying they are with Saddam because they are still scared of Saddam,'' he added. ''They don't know who is going to win.''
