
A Bit Ambiguously, Russia Backs Iraq Over U.S. Threat
By Michael Wines
Sept. 3, 2002

The Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri alHadithi, stopped here briefly today, seeking renewed support from a generally sympathetic Kremlin against the threat of an American effort to remove Saddam Hussein from power. He got it, but not as unambiguously as he might have liked.

After meeting with Mr. Sabri al-Hadithi, the Russian foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, at a news conference with the Iraqi, repeated the Kremlin's position that military action against Iraq ''would seriously undermine the already difficult situation in the Persian Gulf and the Middle East'' and make prospects for a permanent settlement of the region's problems even more remote.

Mr. Ivanov also said Russia hoped the United Nations Security Council would not be asked to approve military action against Iraq, ''so there will be no need for a Russian veto.''

''We are closely analyzing statements made by Washington to the effect that there is no alternative to a military solution,'' Mr. Ivanov said. ''We have not found a single solid argument in those statements to the effect that Iraq poses a threat to U.S. national security. These statements are political.''

Mr. Ivanov's other statements today were slightly more circumspect. In a speech at the Moscow State Institute of Foreign Relations earlier today, he endorsed the notion of taking ''pre-emptive measures'' against global problems, including international terrorism, but only through the United Nations or other alliances.

He said countering terrorism had become the central problem since Sept. 11. President Bush has couched his campaign for the removal of President Hussein as a pre-emptive strike against a regime building weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Ivanov also applauded statements today by Iraq's deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, indicating that readmitting United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq was ''still under consideration.'' Mr. Aziz, in Johannesburg for the world summit meeting on the environment, said he hoped to meet Secretary General Kofi Annan to discuss options for ending the crisis.

There was little else in Mr. Ivanov's remarks today to suggest that Russia's longstanding view of the Iraqi situation has changed.

Russia has sought for years to bring about a political solution to the standoff between Iraq and the United States, mostly with proposals under which weapons inspectors might return to Iraq after a four-year absence. In return, the United Nations would eventually end economic sanctions imposed after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990.

But Iraq so far has rejected all Russian overtures. While Russia has steadily opposed American military action to end the stalemate, it has insisted that Mr. Hussein readmit arms inspectors and meet other conditions the United Nations has imposed for lifting the sanctions.

In his remarks today, Mr. Ivanov did not disavow reports that Russian officials in Washington have met with Iraqi opposition leaders who are bent on deposing Mr. Hussein, though both he and Mr. Sabri al-Hadithi took pains to dismiss the importance of those meetings.

''That was an ordinary event which, we think, was artifically blown out of all proportion by certain mass media,'' Mr. Ivanov said. ''As every diplomat knows, one has to maintain contacts with the other party in order to have broad and objective information. But this in no way indicates any adjustment of Russia's policy line on Iraqi settlement.''

Mr. Sabri al-Hadithi called the exiled Iraqi opposition leaders tools of American and British intelligence and said the meeting had no impact on Iraq's relations with Russia.

In fact, while Russia is opposed in principle to unilateral action against Iraq, politicians here have openly suggested that Russia's stake is economic, and that it has little interest in preserving Mr. Hussein's rule if he can be removed in an internationally acceptable manner.

There was no indication today that Russia and Iraq were on the verge of a new trade agreement. Iraqi officials had suggested that their country was on the verge of signing a deal to purchase $40 billion or more in Russian goods over the next decade, a figure Russia's Foreign Ministry quickly disavowed.

Russian officials have said they are working on a ''framework accord'' for expanding trade, but only within the confines of existing United Nations sanctions.
