

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; U.S., Counting on France, Will Submit Iraq Plan to U.N.
By Julia Preston
Nov. 6, 2002

The United States decided today to submit its final proposal for a resolution on Iraq to the Security Council on Wednesday, after Secretary of State Colin L. Powell concluded that the draft would receive the crucial support of France, Bush administration officials said.

The United States and Britain, who are co-sponsoring the resolution, called for a closed meeting of the Council at 10:30 a.m. to present the revised draft. The move came after Secretary Powell spoke this afternoon with the French foreign minister, Dominique de Villepin, American and French officials said.

''The Secretary worked out final points on key issues this afternoon with de Villepin,'' a United States official said.

French diplomats here did not confirm that agreement had been reached on the resolution. They said Paris would not make a final decision until Mr. de Villepin and President Jacques Chirac had been able to study the complete text of the revised draft. Mr. de Villepin did not have a full new draft when he spoke with Secretary Powell, a French diplomat said. ''We will wait until tomorrow, after the highest authority in France can make an assessment of all of the text,'' the diplomat said.

In summoning the 15-member Security Council, American diplomats did not call for a vote, but indicated they hoped for one by the end of the week.

United States officials said they had tinkered with words but made few important changes to the draft since the last round of formal negotiations in the Council last week. In the last two days, Secretary Powell conferred on the final proposal with other senior officials in Washington and secured President Bush's approval.

Secretary Powell also spoke with foreign ministers in Britain, Russia, China and Mexico and with Secretary General Kofi Annan.

''We think we've got enough worked out on the key elements so that the resolution takes into account what other people have said and also meets the needs of the United States,'' a senior State Department spokesman said. ''It will say clearly that Iraq is in material breach. It will have tough requirements on inspections. And it will speak of serious consequences if Iraq fails to comply.''

Secretary Powell went as far as Washington was willing to go to meet France's concerns by assuring Mr. de Villepin that the administration did not intend to launch a war immediately against Iraq and that it would work with the Security Council to assess whether or not Iraq was cooperating with United Nations weapons inspections, administration officials said today .

Secretary Powell said the United States would decide whether to lead a coalition against Baghdad after seeing whether the Security Council decided to approve military action, the officials said.

Secretary Powell outlined this approach in an interview on Monday with journalists from Security Council nations. A transcript was released today.

''If Iraq violates this resolution and fails to comply,'' he said, ''then the Council has to take into immediate consideration what should be done about that, while the United States and other like-minded nations might make a judgment about what we might do about it if the Council chooses not to act.''

Secretary Powell said repeatedly that ''this is not a resolution for war.'' He said the Bush administration is hoping that President Saddam Hussein will disarm peacefully of any prohibited weapons.

''Everybody keeps looking for war,'' Secretary Powell said. ''We keep looking for peace.''

It remained unclear today how Russia, a permanent member of the Council, would vote. But Russia was not expected to veto.

American officials believed that if France supported the resolution, Mexico, a nonpermanent member and close American ally that has echoed Paris's objections, would back it as well.

France has insisted tenaciously that the first weapons resolution could not include an automatic trigger to go to war if Iraq balked at the inspections. Paris insisted on a second stage in which the Security Council would vote on how to respond if the inspections failed.

The United States proposal recognizes that the Council will debate the issue again.

''But the United States is not handcuffed,'' Secretary Powell said, according to the transcript.
