
Bush Stumps for G.O.P. and Against Iraq
By Elisabeth Bumiller
Sept. 28, 2002

President Bush finished off a lucrative week of political fund-raising tonight by collecting nearly $15 million in five days for Republican candidates and his party.

Every working day this week, from New Jersey to Washington to Texas to the Rockies to the desert of the Southwest, Mr. Bush attended a political fund-raiser. He managed to do so even as he sought to build support for his case against Iraq.

Tonight, after collecting a final $2.1 million at a doubleheader in Phoenix for former United States Representative Matt Salmon, the Republican candidate for governor, and Rick Renzi, a Republican candidate for the House, Mr. Bush returned to his Texas ranch for the weekend.

The $2.1 million from Phoenix, which included money for the Arizona Republican Party, brings Mr. Bush's fund-raising total for this year to more than $130 million, a record. Mr. Bush's check-collecting efforts for closely contested races is driven by his desire to retain Republican control of the House and win back control of the Senate, a goal that party leaders are saying with increasing confidence is in reach.

''Nice to be out West,'' Mr. Bush said at his first of three stops today, a $1.7 million lunchtime fund-raiser at the Adams Mark Hotel in downtown Denver for the state Republican Party and Bob Beauprez. A banker, Mr. Beauprez is running for a newly created House seat against Mike Feeley, a Democrat who was a state Senate minority leader.

Two and a half hours later, Mr. Bush spoke outdoors in a steady rain against the backdrop of cloud-shrouded peaks at the Coconino County Fairgrounds, where he raised no money but was introduced by a pumped-up Mr. Renzi, an insurance executive running against George Cordova, a Democratic businessman, for a new House seat.

Two hours after that, Mr. Bush was at a dinner at the Phoenix Civic Plaza for Mr. Salmon and Mr. Renzi, where he reiterated that the White House and Congress would soon reach an agreement on a use-of-force resolution against Iraq. ''I think you're going to see that our government will be shortly speaking with one voice, and the world will take notice,'' Mr. Bush said.

At all three stops, Mr. Bush spoke about Iraq and his plans to create a new cabinet department for domestic security. But he did not repeat his Monday remark that the legislation creating the department was stalled in the Democratic-controlled Senate because ''the Senate is more interested in special interests in Washington, and not interested in the security of the American people.'' The comment produced criticism from Democrats who said that Mr. Bush was politicizing the Iraq debate.

Today, Mr. Bush took a more conciliatory tack and said the Senate had not acted because it was ''bogged down over a dispute as to how best to run the agency.'' Mr. Bush, who wants to increase the powers that managers in the new agency have over workers, then said he was not opposed to workers' rights.

''Listen, I strongly believe workers ought to be able to join a union if that's what they want to do,'' he said in Flagstaff. ''They ought to be able to have collective bargaining rights, if that's what they choose. But for the sake of our national security, this president, and future presidents, needs the flexibility necessary to put the right people at the right place at the right time to protect the American people.''

Mr. Bush spoke to friendly crowds all day, although at least 2,000 people rallied against military force in Iraq near the Denver hotel where Mr. Bush was speaking.

In Flagstaff, a woman in the crowd at the fairgrounds who loudly booed Mr. Bush was immediately removed by White House staff members and then turned over to the local police and the Secret Service, who questioned her.

In Phoenix this evening, Mr. Bush made his most direct connection between Iraq and Al Qaeda, describing Mr. Hussein as ''a man who hates America, a man who loves to link up with Al Qaeda, a man who is a true threat to America.''
