

THREATS AND RESPONSES: COMBAT; Iraqi Planes Shoot Down American Predator Drone
By Thom Shanker
Dec. 24, 2002

Iraqi warplanes shot down a Predator drone today as it was conducting a surveillance mission about 100 miles southeast of Baghdad, Defense Department and military officials said.

The Iraqi aircraft crossed into the southern ''no flight'' zone to down the craft, which has no pilot aboard, in the vicinity of Al Kut, where an Iraqi air-defense complex has previously been fired on by American and British aircraft, officials said.

The Iraqi jets raced out of the flight-denial area and were not attacked by coalition jets, officials said. It remained unclear tonight whether American or British jets were on patrol at the time.

''They got a lucky shot today, and they brought down the Predator,'' Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joints Chiefs of Staff, said during a Pentagon news briefing. ''I do not see it as an escalation. It's been something they've been doing for literally the last couple of years.''

Pentagon officials said at least two Predators had been shot down previously by Iraq, although by antiaircraft fire from the ground and never before by Iraqi warplanes.

One Predator was destroyed on Aug. 27, 2001, and another on Oct. 10 of last year. A third Predator was lost over Iraq on Sept. 11, 2001, but officials said it has never been conclusively determined whether it was shot down or crashed because of mechanical problems or weather.

The Predator, whose newest versions cost about $4.5 million, can fly missions of up to 24 hours carrying an array of surveillance equipment. Some of them have been designed to carry missiles.

In Iraq, an official statement today said the Predator had been shot down by a combination of Iraqi warplanes and ground fire.

''The sky eagles and the courageous men manning antiaircraft artillery downed a U.S. Predator reconnaissance aircraft which flew in from Kuwaiti airspace to violate our airspace,'' the INA news agency said, quoting an Iraqi military spokesman.

Meanwhile, to keep the pressure on President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, the Pentagon will continue activating troops for possible war, officials said today. Pentagon officials last week confirmed preliminary plans to send 50,000 additional troops to the region next month, doubling the number there now. Even so, the number that might be required to carry out war plans will require additional, larger mobilizations, officials said.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld declined today to discuss the exact timing and number of troops planned for future deployments, but he said activating troops was part of a strategy to make it ''clear to the Iraqis that it's in their best interests to disarm.''

Should President Bush order the nation to war, actions taken now to ready troops in advance of deployment give Mr. Bush ''the ability to do it in some reasonable period of time,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said, adding: ''It is not a simple thing to do. But we're working very hard trying to do it in a way that doesn't unduly inconvenience a group of people by activating them before they're needed.''

Iraq's deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, said today that the size of the American military preparations showed that the United States was preparing for a war with ''the entire Arab nation,'' not just with Iraq. Does it make sense, he asked, that the troop buildup ''targets just Iraq and is aimed only at changing the Iraqi regime?''

''The direct target now is Iraq, but after Iraq, no one will be safe,'' he said.

Mr. Rumsfeld and General Myers also discussed plans today to train members of the Iraqi opposition to assist in any war to disarm Baghdad of weapons of mass destruction. About $9 million has been earmarked thus far for the training program.

''The forces are being trained for a variety of things,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''Some might be as interpreters. Some might be as management of forces that have decided not to continue the battle. Others might be assisting in humanitarian activities.''

He conceded that Mr. Hussein's security forces might try to infiltrate the training program with spies, but that applicants would be vetted to make sure ''bad guys'' are not admitted.
