

THREATS AND RESPONSES: REGIONAL DISCORD; Arab League Is Struggling For Consensus On Iraq Crisis
By Steven Lee Myers
Feb. 20, 2003

Arab leaders quarreled openly today over how to respond to the growing likelihood of an American-led war in Iraq -- even over whether they should meet in an emergency session to debate how to respond.

A week after proposing that the Arab League hold a special summit meeting devoted to the Iraq crisis later this month, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt sharply criticized Arab leaders for failing to respond, and as of today the propsects for an emergency meeting appeared all but doomed.

Meeting in Berlin with Germany's chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, Mr. Mubarak expressed irritation that the league's 22 members appeared unable to forge a unified position to avert a war over Iraq's weapons programs.

''The Arab nation,'' he said at a news conference with Mr. Schröder, ''does not have the strength merely to meet, to agree on a call to other nations or on what could be done with our contacts with the concerned nations to avert a war on Iraq that could have very bad consequences on the region and the world.''

In contrast, Saudi Arabia's foreign minister, Saud al-Faisal, said in remarks published today that he saw no need for an emergency summit meeting, expressing concern that the divisions among Arab states might not be surmountable. Officials in Lebanon, which currently holds the league's rotating chairmanship, were also reported to oppose the summit meeting.

''If that summit does not emerge with a decision concerning the Iraq crisis agreed upon by all Arab states, then it could make matters worse,'' Prince Saud told the newspaper Okaz, according to Reuters.

Egyptian officials had said they hoped an emergency summit meeting would be held on Feb. 28 in the Red Sea city of Sharm el-Sheikh. A spokesman for the Arab League, Hisham Youssef, said tonight that discussions were still were under way for holding a summit meeting, but perhaps not the emergency one Mr. Mubarak called for.

The next regular Arab League summit meeting is scheduled for late March in Bahrain, raising the possibility that it will coincide with a war, but Mr. Youssef said tonight that it would now be moved to Egypt instead and might be held ''very soon.''

The league -- whose members include Iraq and other states opposed to the United States, as well as American allies -- has long been mired in internal disputes, tensions and rivalries. But much as President Bush's threats to disarm Iraq by force have splintered the European Union and NATO, the crisis has exposed the league's deep divisions, as well as its ambivalence when it comes to President Saddam Hussein.

A meeting of Arab League foreign ministers, held here in Cairo last weekend, ended in acrimony as much as in unity. The ministers failed to reach agreement on a summit meeting on Iraq and argued over whether a resolution should call for Mr. Bush or Mr. Hussein to do more to resolve the crisis.

The conference released with a nonbinding resolution -- reportedly approved by consensus -- calling on Arab states to ''refrain from offering any assistance or facilities to any military operation that might threaten the security, safety and territorial integrity of Iraq.''

Afterward, however, Kuwait objected strongly.

Kuwait, now host to tens of thousands of American and British soldiers preparing for a possible invasion into southern Iraq, filed an official complaint with the Arab League's secretary general, Amr Moussa, on Monday, saying it had not approved the wording of the resolution.

Mr. Mubarak sees a unified Arab position as the best way to persuade Iraq to cooperate with United Nations weapons inspectors and avoid an American-led attack.

His trip to Germany -- to be followed with one to France -- appeared to be an effort to align the Arab position with that of Mr. Schröder and President Jacques Chirac of France, who have opposed any war without United Nations approval and demanded that the weapons inspectors should be given more time.

''Sufficient time for the inspections must be given to destroy weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Mubarak said in Berlin. ''But it must be a limited time.''
