

A NATION AT WAR: BOMBING CAMPAIGN; B-2 Hits at Iraqi Communication Center
By Thom Shanker
March 29, 2003

The B-2 stealth bomber that dropped two bunker-busting bombs on a communications center in central Baghdad on Thursday night opened a new phase of the war to destroy the Iraqi government's ability to send orders to commanders and troops in the field, Pentagon and military officials said today.

Iraq's system of command, control and communications has proven resilient to American attacks, these officials added, citing intelligence reports stating that before the war Saddam Hussein ordered the construction of elaborate, duplicate communications systems and the laying of protected, underground fiber-optic lines.

A major unknown, still, is what happened to Mr. Hussein after the initial bombing that began the war. American intelligence agencies, including the National Security Agency, have not intercepted any communications from Mr. Hussein directing Iraqi forces, officials said.

But the Iraqi leadership has been resourceful in assuring that its message of defiance and survival continues to reach the population.

After American bombs and missiles took Iraqi television off the air, it was quickly back up, broadcasting from mobile dishes, Pentagon officials now say.

One remote-relay dish was parked atop a flatbed truck next to a dormitory at the University of Baghdad, where it could not be attacked without risking heavy civilian casualties, according to these officials.

''Saddam had 12 years to consider his 'Doomsday,' '' said one senior Defense Department official. ''He set up a number of redundant communications systems in that time.''

The effort to silence the Hussein regime began with Special Operations missions that covertly attacked discrete command and control targets, and the heavy air attack at these systems is now under way, military officials said.

Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at a Pentagon briefing today that air war commanders are ''concentrating on regime command and control targets, and other targets that allow them to communicate either propaganda or with their military.''

Other senior Pentagon and military officials, responding to public criticism that the war is going more slowly than anticipated, said that American bombs and missiles are now being dropped on a checklist of targets set in order to chip away at the Iraqi regime's communications system.

''It's like plinking at tanks in the field,'' said one senior military officer. ''We'll go after them one node at a time if we have to. It may be slow, but we will bring the system down.''

As one example, General Myers showed video from a Predator pilotless aerial vehicle firing a Hellfire antitank missile at an Iraqi communications dish outside of the Ministry of Information in Baghdad on Thursday.

Some of the work was being done by much heavier ordnance. Air war commanders in Saudi Arabia announced overnight that a B-2 stealth bomber attacked a major link in Iraq's national communications network along the east bank of the Tigris River.

The mission, which used two precision-guided GBU-37 bombs designed to penetrate bunkers -- each weighing almost 5,000 pounds -- was to ''degrade the ability of the Hussein regime to command and control the actions of Iraq's military forces,'' Air Force officials said in a statement.

''In a secret society, Saddam always had ways to communicate that we didn't know about,'' said one Pentagon official. ''He had ways to communicate with the Republican Guard that we didn't know about. He had ways to communicate with the Special Security Organization that the Republican Guard didn't know about. And he had ways to communicate with his intelligence service that the Special Security Organization didn't know about.''

At the United States Central Command's forward headquarters in Qatar, officials today described the Iraqi command and control system as ''very robust,'' with ''many redundancies'' built into it.

''What we'll do in a number of cases,'' said Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks, deputy director of operations at the Central Command, ''is try to influence one layer and then another and then another of decision-making and degrade the capability of the regime to command and control, to issue instructions, to cause reinforcements, all the things that a headquarters or a command would need to do to make operations successful.''
