
A NATION CHALLENGED: DIPLOMACY; U.S. Weighs Tackling Iraq On Its Own, Powell Says
By Todd S. Purdum
Feb. 7, 2002

In his sharpest comments yet on the next phase of the war on terrorism, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told Congress today that President Bush was set on a ''regime change'' in Iraq and warned that it was something the United States ''might have to do alone.''

Testifying before the House International Relations Committee, Secretary Powell, who has been chief among President Bush's advisers in urging caution on Iraq, declined to outline ''any of the details'' under consideration. But in somber tones he described them as ''the most serious assessment of options that one might imagine,'' and said that Mr. Bush was ''leaving no stone unturned as to what we might do.''

Secretary Powell said that United Nations weapons inspectors must have an ''unfettered right'' to conduct searches throughout Iraq for suspected weapons sites, an operation that began after the Persian Gulf war but was suspended in 1998, after months of noncooperation, before American and British bombing of Iraq.

''Let the inspectors in, but without conditions,'' Secretary Powell said. Speaking directly to Iraq, he said, ''We don't trust you, and that's why we need inspectors, and that's why they have to be free to do it any way that they think is appropriate to establish that you are not conducting the activities that we suspect you of, which you claim you are not doing.''

At the same time, Secretary Powell said American intelligence had concluded that Iraq was unlikely to be able to develop a nuclear weapon within a year or shortly thereafter. ''It would take them a bit longer, quite a bit longer than that in the absence of external help,'' he said.

''The president is examining a full range of options of how to deal with Iraq,'' Secretary Powell said. ''Let the inspectors in, he said, as part of the U.N. effort, then regime change is something the United States would -- might have to do alone. How to do it? I would not like to go into any of the details of the options that are being looked at, but it is the most serious assessment of options that one might imagine.''

Secretary Powell also had sharp words for Iran, accusing some elements in the government there of ''meddling'' to destabilize the fledging interim government of Afghanistan, and for North Korea, which he said continued ''to develop and sell missiles that can carry weapons of mass destruction at the same time their people are starving to death.''

Together, the remarks amounted to Secretary Powell's strongest embrace of Mr. Bush's linkage of Iraq, Iran and North Korea in an ''axis of evil'' in his State of the Union address last week. But in contrast to his comments about Iraq, Mr. Powell suggested that dialogue with North Korea and some elements in Iran was still possible.

Mr. Bush's formulation last week took many at the State Department by surprise, but Secretary Powell insisted today that it was ''a statement that all of us had seen beforehand,'' and added, ''We will not shrink back from that early clarity of purpose.''

In sum, Secretary Powell made it clear that there would be no quarreling with the president's basic approach, but that he would seek to preserve running room for diplomatic options, which he did today by repeating that ''we are prepared to talk to North Korea, anytime, anyplace, anywhere, under any set of conditions and with no previously set agenda.''

He also said there were progressive elements in Iran with whom dialogue might also be possible, and added: ''We're making it clear to the Iranians that you've got to choose. If you want to be part of a world that's moving forward, it's time to stop being a state sponsor of terrorism, get out of the axis of evil column and make a choice.''

Even as he defended Mr. Bush's selection of the ''axis of evil,'' he suggested it was hardly a scientific sample by saying, ''There are others that could have been tossed into this camp,'' without identifying them by name.
