

Iraqi Official Affirms Death Of Abu Nidal; Suicide Hinted
By Serge Schmemann
Aug. 21, 2002

A senior Iraqi official confirmed today that Abu Nidal, the man responsible for a brutal trail of terrorism through 20 countries, had died in Iraq.

''Yes, he committed suicide,'' the Iraqi deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, said in Baghdad. He said senior Iraqi officials would supply details on Wednesday.

The death of Abu Nidal, a militant Palestinian who split with Yasir Arafat's Fatah movement in the 1970's to create his own small but extraordinarily deadly band of terrorists, was first reported in a Palestinian newspaper on Monday. Despite Mr. Aziz's claim, the notion that Abu Nidal shot himself remained suspect.

In a report from Baghdad, CNN said it was told by a senior Iraqi official that Abu Nidal shot himself after Iraqi officials accused him of plotting with Kuwait to overthrow the government of Saddam Hussein. Agence France-Presse cited a similar report from a Palestinian official, who told the French news agency that when Iraqi officials came to arrest Abu Nidal, he asked to change his clothes, went into his bedroom and shot himself.

An Arabic-language daily in London, Asharq Al Awsat, said that there was a shootout, and that Abu Nidal was killed by four bullets. The report in the Ramallah paper, Al Ayyam, also said he died from several gunshot wounds, which, if true, would raise doubts of a suicide.

Abu Nidal had many enemies, including Israel and some Palestinian groups, but whatever the circumstances of his death, it was welcomed by the Bush administration. Speaking at President Bush's ranch in Crawford, Texas, the White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, described Abu Nidal as ''one of the most craven and despicable terrorists in the world.

''He was responsible for killing at least 900 people in 20 different countries,'' Mr. Fleischer said. ''The fact that only Iraq would give safe haven to Abu Nidal demonstrates the Iraqi regime's complicity with global terror. He will not be missed.''

An Iraqi official quoted by Reuters said Abu Nidal had entered Iraq from Iran early last year on a forged passport but had been discovered and placed under house arrest. There were various reports that he had been suffering from heart disease, cancer and diabetes, and that he drank heavily. His network, known as Fatah-Revolutionary Council, had ceased being active since his last reported assassination eight years ago.

None of the details could be immediately confirmed. But in contrast to several previous reports of Abu Nidal's death over past years, the fact that he was dead seemed certain.

Abu Nidal was born Sabri al-Bana in Jaffa to a family that was forced into exile after the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948. The family settled in Nablus in the West Bank, but Abu Nidal moved to Saudi Arabia, where he became a member of Fatah.

The best known attack by his group was an attack on the check-in desks of Israeli and American airlines in Rome and Vienna in December of 1985, in which 19 people were killed and more than 100 wounded.

His hatred was focused on Israel and the Jews, but many of his targets were moderate Arabs, Europeans and Americans. His methods included hijackings, bombings and shootings, and he was said to have worked sometimes as a contract killer for other governments.

Over the more than 25 years in which he was active, he moved his headquarters from Iraq to Syria and to Libya, the three Arab states most closely associated with international terrorism. But Israeli intelligence officials regarded him as a loner, who shunned associations with any other terror group.

He was a sworn enemy of Mr. Arafat, and each was said to have tried to assassinate the other. Several senior officials of the Palestine Liberation Army, the armed wing of the Palestine Liberation Organization, were among his victims, including one of the first Palestinians to seek contacts with Israelis, Issam Sartawi.

And it was Abu Nidal's effort to assassinate the Israeli ambassador to London, Shlomo Argov, that pushed Israel to invade Lebanon in 1982 to drive the P.L.O. out.
