

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE U.N.; Some on Security Council Want to Avoid Taking Sides on Iraq
By Felicity Barringer
Feb. 20, 2003

Caught between domestic opposition to a war against Iraq and increasing pressure from the pro-war countries, diplomats from some of the uncommitted members of the Security Council said today that the Council's nonpermanent members should not be forced to take sides in the fight over a new resolution paving the way for war.

Two Council diplomats said they feared that a sharply divided vote in the Security Council would do little to legitimize an American-led war while undermining the legitimacy of the Council, which in the last decade has tended to operate by consensus.

The Mexican ambassador, Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, confirmed that he and his Chilean counterpart, Gabriel Valdés, had been working together on this. The two Latin American countries appear to be trying to persuade the five permanent members to reach an accommodation among themselves rather press their nonpermanent colleagues to take sides.

Among the permanent members, France, Russia and China have argued that United Nations weapons inspectors are making progress and should be given more time to ensure Iraq's compliance with United Nations disarmament demands. The United States and Britain have argued that what appears to be an increase in cooperation is essentially meaningless, and that Iraq will never surrender whatever weapons of mass destruction it may have.

The determined neutrality of the two Latin American Council members could complicate the task of winning Council support for a new resolution on military action against Iraq. A new resolution has been sought by Britain in particular, to give the stamp of international legitimacy to a conflict that is widely opposed by British voters.

Opposition is just as intense, if not more so, in Chile, Mexico and Pakistan, which, along with Cameroon, Guinea and Angola, spoke out Friday for the peaceful disarmament of Iraq. Of the four other elected Council members, Spain and Bulgaria have been supporting the United States and Syria and Germany have sided with France.

Private and public pressure on some of these six uncommitted Council members has mounted in recent days. After the emotional Security Council meeting on Friday, in which only the United States, Britain, Spain and Bulgaria spoke against further delay in disarming Iraq, President Bush placed a phone call to President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan.

In Mexico City on Tuesday, the United States ambassador, Tony Garza, asked for Mexico's ''support and understanding of our position.''

''What we hope for,'' he told reporters, ''are demonstrations of solidarity with our effort to disarm Iraq.''

Prime Minister José María Aznar of Spain is scheduled to meet with President Vicente Fox of Mexico later this week. Asked about Mexico's position on the new resolution expected from the United States, Mr. Aguilar, Mexico's envoy to the United Nations, said that ''any resolution should be passed by consensus.''

Pakistan, which with Syria is one of only two Muslim countries on the Security Council, is all too familiar with Islamic militance and anti-American sentiment at home. Its ambassador, Munir Akram, said, ''Obviously we have to see how we can accommodate both the United States and our own political reality.''

The resolution, which has been widely discussed in Washington, London and the United Nations, has been devised as a simple document declaring that the Iraqi government is in ''material breach'' of its 12-year-old obligations to disarm and that ''serious consequences,'' meaning the use of military force, will follow if it does not immediately do so.

American officials have discussed establishing -- perhaps through Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector for chemical and biological weapons -- a series of benchmark tests which Iraq would have to meet by a very tight deadline. Mr. Blix is due to make a written report to the Council by March 1.

Several Council diplomats said that if he sets clear-cut tests for Iraqi compliance that the Iraqis fail, this might persuade them to vote on the American side.

A spokesman for Mr. Blix's office said he knew of no Security Council instruction authorizing Mr. Blix to establish such tests as part of his March 1 report.
