

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ALLIES; Britain Plans Army Exercises; Parliament Is to Debate Iraq
By Alan Cowell
Sept. 14, 2002

As the United States steps up pressure for the removal of the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, Britain's Defense Ministry said today that 6,000 British troops would embark on a major exercise to test the army's ability to marshal large amounts of fuel, ammunition and other military equipment.

British officials denied that the exercise was related to preparations for military action against Iraq. But the deployment fed a sense of foreboding in Britain -- the closest ally in President Bush's campaign against Mr. Hussein -- that war is again looming after the dispatch this year of British marines to Afghanistan.

One day after Mr. Bush challenged the United Nations to enforce its resolutions ordering Iraq to destroy its weapons of mass destruction, Jack Straw, Britain's foreign secretary, said that if United Nations weapons inspectors were not allowed back into Iraq, ''then the will of the U.N. has to be enforced by other means, which inevitably would mean military action.''

Today Iraq rejected demands for the unconditional return of weapons inspectors.

While there is no formal deadline for military action, Prime Minister Tony Blair has announced that Parliament will be recalled on Sept. 24 to debate the Iraq crisis. On that day, British officials said, Mr. Blair will publish a dossier he has said will substantiate assertions that Iraq represents what Mr. Bush called ''a grave and gathering danger.''

The logistical military exercise will take place starting Sunday in Hampshire and Suffolk counties and offshore, and is to last until Oct. 12. The Defense Ministry said it was intended to test the British Army's abilities to move equipment by sea and land.

''This is an exercise that has long been planned to test our logistics capabilities,'' a ministry spokesman said. The ministry denied British newspaper reports that British armored units were about to be sent to the Persian Gulf region in preparation for an invasion of Iraq.

''There are no plans for the deployment of troops,'' the spokesman said.

Nonetheless, Britain has long prided itself on being Europe's most flexible military power and the one most ready to move swiftly in support of the United States. It contributed 20,000 troops to the coalition fighting the gulf war in 1991. Some military specialists said the current maneuver would add credibility to Britain's threats to join in military action if the United Nations failed to persuade Mr. Hussein to readmit weapons inspectors.

The exercise ''sends a clear message to the Iraqi government that Britain does have this sort of capability and can put it into practice,'' said one military expert, Ian Kemp of Jane's Defense Weekly.

According to Sarah Hayward, a Defense Ministry official, Britain currently has troops in several parts of the gulf region, Afghanistan, the Balkans and Africa. Before the Sept. 11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon last year, Britain sent some 22,000 troops for desert maneuvers in Oman. Those exercises tested -- and highlighted flaws in -- equipment that might be used in the event of a land war against Iraq.

Some 1,200 British troops remain in the gulf region, supporting 470 British soldiers serving with international forces in Afghanistan, Ms. Hayward said. Another 1,200 personnel are in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain and eastern Turkey to support British and American warplanes enforcing the no-flight zones in northern and southern Iraq.

Britain has all-volunteer armed forces of 186,000 troops, 100,000 of them in the army. It has 4,000 troops overseas in or near the Balkans and 300 in Sierra Leone, in West Africa.

Because of President Bush's speech to the United Nations on Thursday, there is a sense here that political opposition to military action against Iraq within Mr. Blair's Labor Party could be softened by a United Nations resolution authorizing force.

But many continue to express misgivings or hostility toward military action against Iraq. ''A lot of members are in despair,'' Ann Black, a member of the Labor Party's national leadership, said on BBC radio. ''They are also alarmed and very disturbed at what is happening.''
