

A NATION AT WAR: COVERAGE; Pentagon Says Geraldo Rivera Will Be Removed From Iraq
By David Carr
April 1, 2003

Geraldo Rivera, the Fox News Channel correspondent who broadcast a report from Iraq on Sunday night that gave details of the position and plans of United States troops, is expected to be pulled from the country on Tuesday, military officials said yesterday.

The expected decision by Fox, a unit of the News Corporation, to remove Mr. Rivera from the battlefield, after intense pressure by the military to do so, followed a day of conflicting statements.

Yesterday morning, an official at Central Command headquarters in Camp Saliya, Qatar, said Mr. Rivera's reporting had compromised ''operational security'' and that he had been escorted back to Kuwait.

By the afternoon, Bryan G. Whitman, the deputy assistant secretary of defense for media relations, said the matter had not been settled.

''We have been in contact with the news organization,'' Mr. Whitman said. ''They are taking it very seriously, and we will make the appropriate determination once we have been able to evaluate all the facts here.''

But, Defense Department officials and Fox News executives said, the company will announce today that Mr. Rivera has been pulled from his assignment in Iraq.

If he is not, the military will remove Mr. Rivera from the country, a military official said.

Mr. Rivera is not part of the program of officially sanctioned journalists who have been assigned to specific units, but had been traveling with the 101st Airborne Division of the United States Army.

On Sunday night, Mr. Rivera was being interviewed by a Fox News anchor, John Gibson, and began drawing a map in the sand.

''Let me draw a few lines here for you,'' he said. ''First, I want to make some emphasis here that these hash marks here, this is us. We own that territory. It's 40 percent, maybe even a little more than that.''

He went on at length with more specifics, and military officials at Central Command felt that by drawing lines in the sand, Mr. Rivera crossed one as well.

''At one point, he actually revealed the time of an attack prior to its occurrence,'' Lt. Mark Kitchens, a spokesman at Central Command, said yesterday morning. Lieutenant Kitchens added that Mr. Rivera had been escorted to Kuwait.

CNN reported at 8:40 a.m. yesterday that Mr. Rivera was leaving Iraq, while MSNBC reported an hour later that he was already in Kuwait City. But the game of Where's Geraldo? began anew when Mr. Rivera appeared on Fox News at 11:33 a.m., still in Iraq and still with the 101st Airborne.

''It sounds to me like some rats at my former network, NBC, are spreading some lies about me,'' Mr. Rivera said on the air. ''You know, they can't compete fair and square on the battlefield, so they're trying to stab me in the back.''

Although Mr. Rivera was not officially detailed to the 101st Airborne, all reporters in a theater of war are subject to Pentagon oversight.

''We practice security at the source,'' said Mr. Whitman, the Pentagon spokesman. ''If they are in our battle space, they are not allowed to divulge classified information.''

A spokesman for Fox said, ''We are in contact with the Pentagon and we are looking into the matter.''

Another United States reporter who was not officially part of the Pentagon's program to attach journalists with the troops, Philip Smucker, a freelance reporter for The Christian Science Monitor, was ordered immediately out of Iraq last week for a similar offense.

Mr. Smucker gave an interview to CNN in which he divulged a specific location for the Fifth Regiment of the First Marine Division.

Mr. Rivera denied in his dispatch from Iraq yesterday that he had made a mistake.

''I'm further into the country than I have ever been,'' he said, adding, ''I'm having a great relationship with the 101st Airborne. I intend to march into Baghdad alongside them.''

That is not going to happen, one Pentagon official said.

''We are just giving the news organization an opportunity to do the right thing and pull him out,'' this official said. ''If they don't, we will.''
