

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; U.S. Revises Iraq Resolution, But an Accord Still Eludes It
By Julia Preston
Oct. 22, 2002

The United States presented a slightly revised draft resolution on Iraq to the four other permanent members of the Security Council today, but it did not reach agreement with France and Russia, diplomats said.

The draft, presented by Ambassador John D. Negroponte, acknowledged that the Security Council could hold another round of debate after weapons inspectors returned to Iraq and issued a negative report. But Washington will not agree to any language that would block it from taking action on its own, American officials said.

The United States continued to insist on a single resolution that would include both a tough weapons inspections regime and a strong enough threat of ''consequences'' to give the administration a legal basis to start a military attack on its own if it is dissatisfied with the Security Council's response to Iraqi violations exposed in the inspections.

France, backed tacitly by Russia, has argued for two resolutions, leaving the authorization of war until after the arms inspectors have reported violations by Baghdad.

''The clear consequences for Iraq failing to disarm peacefully is that Iraq will be disarmed through the use of force,'' Richard Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said in Washington.

The United States included concessions in the draft, dropping its demand to be allowed, along with other permanent Council members, to attach its own weapons experts to the United Nations inspections teams that will be heading to Iraq after the resolution passes, the diplomats said.

Washington also tempered its requirement for international security guards to accompany the inspectors on their searches, but it reiterated a need for foreign security at the inspectors' operational bases, Council diplomats said. It did not change its proposal that Iraqi weapons experts be allowed to travel out of the country to be interviewed by the inspectors.

Diplomats from France and Russia were especially tight-lipped after the meeting today at the United States mission. On his way in, France's ambassador, Jean-David Levitte, suggested that the deliberations over the weekend in Paris had not produced accord with the American proposal, major elements of which were unveiled late last week.

In that proposal, the United States removed the phrase ''all necessary means'' from the passage threatening Iraq if it failed comply with weapons inspections. That phrase is the most explicit diplomatic y
Administration officials signaled today that the time for negotiating was drawing to a close, saying the United States wanted the resolution adopted as soon as possible.

''We're also making clear that it's time to wrap this up and would like to see this finished,'' Mr. Boucher said.

In Moscow, Russian officials threw their support behind France's approach.

''Moscow would not like a new draft resolution to contain provisions authorizing the automatic use of force against Iraq, or unfeasible requirements which might lead to new crises and tensions in the country,'' Deputy Foreign Minister Yuri Y. Fedotov said.

Russian officials confirmed that Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations inspection team, would arrive in Moscow on Tuesday for talks with top officials.

After nearly six weeks of negotiations, the United States and its ally Britain still have not put their draft proposal on the table before all 15 members of the Security Council. But American officials suggested today that they hoped to take that next step by Wednesday. --------------------

Elder Bush Says U.S. Erred

CHICAGO, Oct. 21 (Reuters) -- The United States erred in expecting Saddam Hussein of Iraq to fall from power after his defeat in the Persian Gulf war, former President George Bush said today.

''We thought Saddam Hussein would leave power,'' Mr. Bush told a mortgage banking conference.

But Mr. Bush, who was commander in chief during the 1991 conflict, defended his decision not to occupy Baghdad and oust the Iraqi leader.

''We would not have had the support of our allies if we had entered Baghdad,'' he said. Saudi, Turkish and possibly French forces would have withdrawn support if American soldiers had occupied the capital, he said.
