

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; 5 Killed in Error at a Kurdish Checkpoint
By C. J. Chivers
March 5, 2003

Five Muslim men, including a leader of a prominent Islamist political party in northern Iraq, were shot and killed today at a highway checkpoint here by Kurdish security officers.

Immediately after the killings, Kurdish officials said the action of the officers had thwarted a terrorist squad that has been hunting for American Special Forces teams in the area. But by nightfall, as it became clear the dead were members of a registered political party, the authorities issued statements of regret. It appeared the dead men had been mistaken for terrorists.

Dr. Barham Salih, prime minister for the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, which controls the eastern Kurdish zone, expressed sorrow for the deaths and said the Kurdish authorities had begun an investigation. ''If there are people who have overreacted and did not adhere to the rules of engagement, there will be repercussions,'' he said.

Among the dead was Abdullah Qasri, a member of the political bureau of Komali Islami Kurdistan, an Islamic group that has formal relations with the Patriotic Union.

Mr. Qasri, 36 and the father of five, lived roughly two hours from here. He had visited the region for a Komali meeting today, and was on his way home when the shootings occurred at a Patriotic Union checkpoint. His Toyota Land Cruiser was riddled with bullets fired from automatic weapons at close range. Three of his bodyguards and his driver died with him.

The killings underscored the confused and growing tensions between the secular Kurdish parties and Islamic activists here.

In recent weeks, members of Ansar al-Islam, a militant group in northern Iraq that the United States says is connected to Al Qaeda, have been planning attacks against American Special Forces, according to a hand-written intelligence report from inside the group.

Several recent incidents have contributed to the rising tensions. Last week, a suicide bomber killed two Kurdish guards and a taxi driver at a checkpoint near a Kurdish military headquarters in Halabja. The headquarters, near the front lines between the Patriotic Union and Ansar, is frequently visited by American intelligence teams.

Over the last four days, according to two senior Kurdish officials, three vehicles believed to be carrying Ansar members have been reported prowling through areas frequented by the Americans in and near the city of Sulaimaniya.

The vehicles have made repeated passes at an airstrip in Bakrajo, at a military headquarters near here where the Americans work by day, and at homes of Jalal Talabani, the Patriotic Union's leader, where the Americans have been staying, the officials said.

The Patriotic Union had set up a dragnet to catch the Ansar teams.

It appeared Mr. Qasri had the misfortune of traveling in a vehicle that resembled one reportedly used by Ansar, and, with his long beard and bearded guards, had driven through a city where the police were watching for men of that description.

One witness said that as the Land Cruiser passed the Patriotic Union's military headquarters, it attracted the attention of a Patriotic Union pickup truck, which sped ahead to the checkpoint.

The witness said an occupant of the pickup told the guards at the checkpoint that the Land Cruiser was an Ansar car, and when the Land Cruiser arrived moments later, there was a heavy volley of gunfire. Nine bullets passed through the windshield, at least eight passed through the Land Cruiser's left side, and almost all of the windows were fully shot out.

It was not immediately clear tonight if the Komali bodyguards fired their weapons.

After initially telling reporters the dead men were from Ansar, the Patriotic Union quickly corrected the information, and the bodies were taken to the Komali party office in Sulaimaniya and laid in the group's house of worship, the Jihad Mosque.

Haji Dilshad Garmiyani, another member of the Komali political bureau, said the party, which has a small militia near Ansar's positions along the Iranian border, would refrain from violence pending the results of the Patriotic Union's inquiry.
