

Annan Reaffirms U.N. Role In Iraq Weapons Inspections
By Barbara Crossette
Aug. 7, 2002

Secretary General Kofi Annan told Iraq formally in a letter yesterday that the United Nations Security Council, not the government of Saddam Hussein, would decide on what basis weapons inspectors would return to Iraq after a four-year break.

Replying to an invitation from Iraq's foreign minister, Naji Sabri, sent to him last Thursday, Mr. Annan not only restated requirements for inspections laid down by the Security Council but told the Iraqis that their invitation should be addressed directly to the head of the inspection commission, Hans Blix. The Iraqis had asked Mr. Annan to send Dr. Blix and his team.

Mr. Annan's response appears to have ended Iraq's hopes of circumventing the Security Council's guidelines for the functioning of the inspection panel it created late in 1999, the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission. Dr. Blix, a Swedish international lawyer and former director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna, became executive chairman of the new commission in March 2000.

''Since the executive chairman of Unmovic reports directly to the Security Council,'' Mr. Annan wrote in his seven-paragraph letter yesterday, ''and in accordance with your own wishes, I have conveyed your letter to the Security Council and discussed its contents with its members.''

Mr. Annan wrote that the Council welcomed the first invitation in four years to bring inspectors back to Iraq, where Dr. Blix's commission has never been invited to go.

But, Mr. Annan added, the resolution creating the inspection commission had been ''clear and precise'' in setting out what Iraq must do in order to have sanctions imposed in 1990 lifted.

That includes allowing inspectors to return to investigate what has changed since the last inspections. The inspectors would draw up a plan within 60 days to tackle unresolved issues surrounding Iraqi biological, chemical and nuclear programs as well as missile development beyond what is allowed for defense, and Iraq would have to comply with that plan.

Mr. Sabri's letter seemed intended to dodge those requirements by suggesting that a joint Iraqi-United Nations review could eliminate all concerns and sanctions could be lifted.

Earlier this year, the Security Council again eased the effects of its sanctions on Iraqi civilians by allowing a large range of nonmilitary goods to be imported without review. But the Iraqi leadership has chafed under the unchanged restriction that all its oil revenues go to a United Nations-managed account to pay for those purchases, as well as to supply aid to the Kurds in northern Iraq and pay compensation to the victims of the Kuwait invasion and occupation.

Security Council members who met with the secretary general on Monday agreed that the most important step was to begin genuine on-site inspections again in Iraq. The last inspectors, working for an earlier inspection commission known as Unscom, were withdrawn in 1998 in advance of American and British bombing of Baghdad for its noncooperation

On Monday, the United States was the most wary of Iraq's intentions and most opposed to a positive response to Baghdad's invitation, according to diplomats present at the meeting. Ambassador John D. Negroponte, the American envoy, said after the meeting with Mr. Annan that the Iraqis were not offering anything new, just trying again to rewrite the 1999 resolution.

''On the basis of that letter in and of itself, we would be deeply skeptical, to say the least, of any move by the Secretariat to accept the Iraqi invitation,'' Mr. Negroponte said.

Since his politically risky trip to Baghdad in early 1998 to sign an agreement with Mr. Hussein to revive inspections, a deal the Iraqis soon dishonored, Mr. Annan has put some distance between himself and the Iraqi government. He has, however, met several times with the Iraqi foreign minister this year, meetings at which Dr. Blix has been present.

His letter today made clear that the Iraqis should not attempt to deflect Security Council directions by appealing for a different kind of negotiations through the secretary general.
