

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Annan Says Talk of War With Iraq Is Premature, but Warns Baghdad It Must Disarm
By Julia Preston
Jan. 15, 2003

Secretary General Kofi Annan said today that it was too early for the Security Council to consider military action against Iraq and said he remained ''both optimistic and hopeful'' that war could be avoided.

At a wide-ranging morning news conference here, Mr. Annan called for a patient timetable for United Nations arms inspections in Iraq and said he would ''not be surprised'' if a diplomatic solution was found to defuse the nuclear crisis with North Korea.

Raising his voice after he had remained quiet for weeks on the two explosive issues, the secretary general warned that if Iraq did not cooperate to give up illegal weapons, he expected that the Council would support war to disarm the country.

Mr. Annan said the United States-led military buildup in the Persian Gulf has helped the effort to disarm Iraq by pressuring Baghdad to cooperate with the inspections. ''There is no doubt in anyone's mind that the pressure has been effective, that it has worked,'' he said. ''Without that pressure I don't think the inspectors would be back in Iraq today.''

But on the pace of the inspections, the secretary general's tone was nearly the opposite of remarks by President Bush, who said today that ''time is running out'' for Saddam Hussein as the Iraqi president.

Mr. Annan said a debate in the Council over war could be set off only by a report from the weapons inspectors of a serious violation by Iraq.

''I don't think we are there yet, so really I don't want to talk about war,'' Mr. Annan said in his first meeting this year with correspondents here. ''I think the inspectors are just getting up to speed.''

He said Baghdad's cooperation so far was ''not perfect, but it is better than it used to be.'' He said the report that Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief weapons inspectors, will give to the Council on Jan. 27 will help clarify the schedule for the inspections.

The secretary general said he was ''extremely worried'' about the possible impact of war on the Iraqi people. He acknowledged that the United Nations had been busy making contingency plans to provide relief aid to civilians and refugees, while also working on ''post-conflict structures.''

''Obviously we are doing some thinking, but we are not assuming anything,'' he said about whether Mr. Hussein would be toppled from power.

United Nations relief officials today finished three days of closed-door meetings in a hotel in Geneva to discuss plans for emergency relief for civilians during and after a war.

''I am both optimistic and hopeful that if we handle the situation right, and the pressure on the Iraqi leadership is maintained and the inspectors continue to work as aggressively as they are doing, we may be able to disarm Iraq peacefully,'' Mr. Annan said.

The secretary general insisted that under Resolution 1441, which set up the weapons inspections, the Security Council should decide what ''consequences'' to impose on Iraq if it commits a grave breach. Bush administration officials argue that the resolution gives the United States the authority to attack Iraq if the Council declines to act.

The British foreign secretary, Jack Straw, echoed Washington's view today, though he added that London would prefer a second Council resolution authorizing the attack.

On North Korea, Mr. Annan said his envoy, Maurice Strong, a Canadian businessman and diplomat, was in Pyongyang today, primarily discussing the difficulties that have arisen for the United Nations in trying to raise funds for food and medicine for the impoverished country after its abrupt withdrawal on Jan. 10 from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.

But Mr. Annan said he had instructed Mr. Strong to be open to discussions with North Korean officials on the political crisis as well. He said the ''signals'' from Washington and Pyongyang gave him confidence that a diplomatic deal could be reached.

''I think we are still at an early stage of this crisis,'' Mr. Annan said.
