

A NATION AT WAR: THE UNITED NATIONS; Security Council Votes to Revive Oil-for-Food Program in Iraq
By Felicity Barringer
March 29, 2003

Fifteen hands were raised in unanimous assent today as the Security Council gave Secretary General Kofi Annan temporary authority to provide food and medicine to Iraq through a seven-year-old program that was suspended on the eve of the war.

The passage of the resolution renewing the oil-for-food program for 45 days under the temporary control of the United Nations represented a brittle truce between Council members after a week of feuding over the scope and intent of the authorization. But it did not resolve the larger question of who would control a postwar Iraqi administration.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock, the British envoy, said after the meeting that the agreement ''was one of those negotiations at which the Security Council sometimes thinks that it's going to get into trouble on the politics, but manages to find a way through on the practicalities of the situation on the ground, without treading on political corns or political red lines.''

The resolution had gone through at least seven separate drafts in the past week, diplomats said, as Russia and Syria argued that the original language effectively condoned the war and anticipated the replacement of Saddam Hussein's government.

Tonight the Russian Foreign Ministry issued a statement saying the resolution represented a ''technical decision of a temporary character'' that ''does not mean the legitimization of the military action'' of the American and British forces.

The resolution had become a battleground in part because the countries that had opposed the resort to military force were suspicious that the resolution on aid would be a Trojan horse setting out the preconditions for an American-led reconstruction period in Iraq.

The early drafts of the resolution had included language about United Nations coordination ''with the relevant authorities,'' which some said implied that both the war and an American- and British-dominated postwar administration would have the sanction of the United Nations. The phrase ''relevant authorities'' did not appear in the final draft.

Executives of the oil-for-food program have said there is as much as $2.4 billion worth of food, medicine and other emergency essentials currently in the pipeline, along with $6.5 billion in other goods. It is unclear how much of that material is positioned close enough to Iraq to be available for use in the next few weeks, or whether the military situation will be secure enough for it to be distributed.

Separately, a group of United Nations agencies, including the World Food Program, opened an appeal for $2.2 billion in emergency relief supplies to cover a six-month period.

The food program is appealing for $1.3 billion of the total, which, its officials said, could represent the largest aid effort undertaken to date.

In a briefing in Amman, Jordan, today, Fadela Chaib, the spokesman for the World Health Organization, said that many of the 1.7 million residents of the southern city of Basra are without fresh water.

An estimated 60 percent of Iraq's population of 24 million people had depended on the oil-for-food program for their basic nutritional needs. While all non-Iraqi United Nations personnel were withdrawn from the country on the eve of the war, the Deputy Secretary General, Louise Frechette, told a news conference today that at least 3,000 Iraqi workers remain to distribute supplies. They are doing so ''where they can,'' she said.

At the southern Iraqi port of Umm Qasr today, the Sir Galahad, a British vessel bringing the first shipments of aid, arrived with 100 tons of water and 150 tons of basic food like rice, powdered milk and lentils. It had been delayed several days because the harbor had been mined.

In his remarks at the Security Council today, the United States ambassador, John D. Negroponte, said that the United States ''will facilitate the necessary coordination on the ground in Iraq between coalition authorities and the United Nations and associated relief agency staff as oil-for-food supplies and other humanitarian assistance arrive and are distributed, as circumstances on the ground 