

Cheney Doubts Weapons Inspectors Can End Baghdad's Threat
By Christopher Marquis
Aug. 8, 2002

Iraq has so diligently concealed its effort to develop weapons of mass destruction in recent years that the return of international weapons inspectors might be insufficient to eliminate the threat, Vice President Dick Cheney said today.

''So many of us, I think, are skeptical that simply returning the inspectors will solve the problem,'' Mr. Cheney said in a speech to the Commonwealth Club of California.

Until now the United Nations' demand that Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, accept unrestricted inspection of suspected weapons laboratories has been a central goal of the world organization and many American allies.

The resumption of such inspections, which ended four years ago, has been widely viewed as a last possibility to avert an American attack on Iraq.

The vice president's remarks were the latest sign that the Bush administration, which is heavily engaged in planning for war with Iraq, is likely to proceed with its effort to oust Mr. Hussein even if he were to allow the United Nations inspectors to return.

In a separate speech today, delivered at almost the same time Mr. Cheney was making his remarks, President Bush said he had not ruled out a diplomatic solution to the standoff with Mr. Hussein.

Administration officials say Baghdad is trying to build an arsenal of biological, chemical and even nuclear weapons.

Asserting that ''we owe it to our children to deal with these threats,'' Mr. Bush vowed to ''explore all options and all tools at my disposal: diplomacy, international pressure, perhaps even the military.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Bush has said repeatedly that the goal of American policy in Iraq is ''regime change.''

Last week Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said that Iraq's actions to conceal weapons laboratories and make them mobile might make inspections useless. Mr. Rumsfeld suggested it would take putting troops in Iraq to locate and dismantle such labs, arguing that they could not be eliminated with air power alone.

After Iraq's retreat in the Persian Gulf War, the United Nations required that Iraq end all research on biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and stop developing missiles capable of delivering them. The Security Council imposed sweeping sanctions against the country that would remain in effect until Iraq had fully disarmed, as verified by inspectors. But the council withdrew its last inspection team in 1998, after its leaders complained that Iraq was hampering their work.

With Defense Department officials poring over war strategies, the Iraqi government this month invited leading members of Congress to come to the country and conduct their own weapons inspections. Baghdad also asked the head of the United Nations inspection commission, Hans Blix, to renew talks.

The administration and Congressional officials dismissed the offer as a stalling tactic. Kofi Annan, the United Nations Secretary General, tersely notified Iraq that the Security Council, and not Baghdad, would decide the terms under which weapons inspectors would return to Iraq.

Mr. Cheney said ''a great deal depends'' on the ability of inspectors to move freely and conduct surprise searches. But even if they had favorable conditions, Mr. Cheney voiced doubts that inspectors could fully detect and dismantle Mr. Hussein's arms program.

''You've got to remember, he's had about four years now to hide everything that he's been doing, and he's gotten to be very good at that, worked at it very aggressively,'' Mr. Cheney said. ''So even if you had the return of inspectors, I'm not sure they would be able to do enough to be able to guarantee us and our friends in the region that he had, in fact, complied.''
