

As British Antiwar Sentiment Rises, Blair Defends Iraq Stand
By Warren Hoge
Jan. 14, 2003

Prime Minister Tony Blair today took on domestic opponents of his hard-line stance on Iraq, saying that while he accepted that they might feel the problem was far away and not urgent, he was convinced it was a direct and imminent threat to Britain.

''I know and understand the concerns that people have,'' the prime minister, who is President Bush's staunchest ally on the issue, told a Downing Street news conference. ''The threat seems to some people to be remote, but I passionately believe that we must disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction.''

Public opinion surveys and comments from a growing number of Labor members of Parliament show antiwar sentiment on the rise at a time when the British military is preparing troops and equipment for Persian Gulf missions and Mr. Blair continues to declare his solidarity with President Bush.

The Ministry of Defense said a small group of British logistics experts arrived in Kuwait today to make way for the possible arrival of combat troops and equipment there. On Saturday, the aircraft carrier Ark Royal left for the Persian Gulf, leading Britain's biggest naval deployment since the Falklands War in 1982.

In the latest of many surveys tracking falling support in Britain for action against Iraq, a poll based on 1,425 answers taken this past weekend for the ITV network showed that only 13 percent would support action by America and Britain alone but that 53 percent would if the move were endorsed by the United Nations.

''Polls or no polls, my job in a situation like this is sometimes to say the things that people don't want to hear,'' Mr. Blair told reporters. ''And I have said to people, I believe this issue is a real active threat to British national security.''

He rejected claims that the issue of Iraq was driven solely by the Americans and said he had raised the subject at his first meeting with President Bush in February 2001. ''If George Bush and America were not raising this issue, I would be urging them to raise it because it is important,'' he said.

Mr. Blair said evidence of how groups and ''rogue states'' were sponsoring trade in chemical and biological weapons and seeking to develop nuclear capability crossed his desk every day. ''Anyone who believes in today's world that you can have these groups and these weapons proliferating and Britain not be involved is, I think, naïve and misguided,'' he said.

''It is a matter of time, unless we act and take a stand, before terrorism and weapons of mass destruction come together,'' he added.

He said that while Britain favored returning to the Security Council for another resolution that would authorize force in Iraq, he believed there could be military action without one in the event of a serious breach by Iraq.

Pressed on the point by questioners, he responded with a question of his own.

''Are people seriously saying that when the U.N. has taken a stand on weapons of mass destruction where they have said to Iraq, 'You have to disarm yourself or these weapons, these chemical, nuclear, biological weapons,' are people really saying that if there is a breach of that U.N. resolution that no action should follow? If we did that, we would send a message to the outside world which would, in my view, be absolutely disastrous for the security of the world.''

Mr. Blair dismissed the widespread reports of division over Iraq in his cabinet as ''complete nonsense.''

''People basically are still in exactly the same place,'' he said. ''They want this thing dealt with through the U.N., but they want the U.N. to deal with it, not be a way of avoiding dealing with it.''

The prime minister is expected to fly to Washington to meet President Bush soon after publication of the Jan. 27 United Nations report by the arms inspection team now in Iraq.
