

A NATION AT WAR: ANKARA; Turkey Denies Reports That Its Troops Defied U.S. and Entered Iraq
By Frank Bruni
March 23, 2003

The Turkish military issued a formal denial today of news reports that Turkish troops had entered northern Iraq late Friday in defiance of American requests that they stay away.

Iraqi Kurdish leaders also said there had not been any incursion of Turkish troops into northern Iraq since the American military strikes on Iraq began, and they warned Turkey that such a move could lead to violence between the troops and Iraqi Kurds.

''I can confirm to you that no Turkish troops entered into our areas,'' said Hoshyar Zubari, a senior official of the Kurdish Democratic Party, at a news conference this afternoon in the northern Iraq city of Erbil.

The arrival of such troops, he warned, might set off clashes between Kurds and the Turkish Army. ''There will be resistance,'' he said.

That result is precisely what American officials fear, and they have repeatedly urged the Turkish government not to allow new troops into northern Iraq, where Turkey has maintained a small military presence for years.

Turkey has thousands of troops along the border between Iraq and Turkey, about 30 miles south of here, and late Friday, the Turkish foreign minister, Abdullah Gul, said some of them would enter Iraq, although he did not say when.

The reason, he said, was to prevent terrorist activity in Turkey. He said Turkish Kurdish rebels based in northern Iraq had taken part in bloody clashes in southeastern Turkey during the 1990's that left tens of thousands of people dead.

''Turkish troops will go in,'' Mr. Gul told reporters in Ankara.

In an interview on CNN Turk tonight, Mr. Gul mentioned an additional reason for possibly ordering troops into northern Iraq: any sign of refugees coming toward Turkey.

He said that while Turkey was prepared to provide aid to refugees within Iraqi borders, ''We are not going to let them in Turkey.''

After Mr. Gul's comments to reporters on Friday, there were conflicting reports about whether Turkish troops had already entered Iraq.

Military sources told reporters that 1,000 to 1,500 Turkish soldiers had moved into northern Iraq from the Turkish town of Cukurca, east of here, in a corner of Turkey near both Iraq and Iran. But both Turkish officials and aid groups that are keeping a watch on the border said they had no evidence of that.

People in northern Iraq said today that they had not noticed such a movement of troops, and people in the area of Turkey between Cizre and northern Iraq said they had not seen the soldiers cross the border.

The confusion continued throughout the day and into tonight. A statement released this afternoon by the Turkish military acknowledged news reports of troop movements into Iraq and said: ''The reports are not true.''

Asked about Turkish movement into Iraq, Gen. Tommy R. Franks, leader of coalition forces, said today: ''I believe that the Turkish formations that we see in northern Iraq are very light formations. We see them move in and out of Turkey.''

He said there was ''continuing discussion'' about how much Turkish activity was acceptable, adding, ''I guess I would say that that's sort of above my pay grade.''

The British defense secretary, Geoff Hoon, described what he called a limited incursion of Turkish troops into Iraq, a border policing operation that he told reporters in London was not a cause for concern.

The possibility of Turkish troops' entering northern Iraq has been a source of persistent tension between the United States and Turkey.

On Thursday, when the Turkish Parliament passed a resolution opening Turkish airspace to American military places, it also authorized Turkish troops to enter Iraq if it was deemed necessary.

Turkish airspace subsequently remained closed to American warplanes for more than 24 hours while Turkish officials sought an endorsement from the United States for the movement of Turkish troops.

Although they did not succeed, Turkish leaders announced late Friday night that they had finally opened the airspace.
