

THREATS AND RESPONSES: CONGRESS; Daschle Predicts Broad Support For Military Action Against Iraq
By John H. Cushman Jr.
Oct. 7, 2002

Senator Tom Daschle, the majority leader, predicted today that the Senate would soon pass a resolution authorizing President Bush to take military action against Iraq, that it would win with broad bipartisan support and that he would probably vote for it even without restrictions that he personally favors.

Several other prominent senators of both parties made similar predictions on the morning news talk programs, indicating a clear consensus that roughly three-fourths of the Senate, and perhaps more, would agree to a resolution acceptable to President Bush, who is seeking broad authority from Congress.

Mr. Daschle had been the most senior member of the House or Senate to withhold support from the White House, favoring a restrictive draft resolution that Mr. Bush has rejected. Mr. Daschle did not sign on to a compromise with the White House that was endorsed last week by Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the minority leader. So his statement today signals that the fight over the resolution's wording is winding down.

Asked if he was ''inclined to support'' a resolution, Mr. Daschle replied, ''I am.''

''Obviously I want to do as much as I can to, as I said, to go back and tie down the language a little bit more if we can,'' he continued in an interview with Tim Russert on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC. ''But at least, at the very least, to be able to state where I would improve the language if we are not successful in making the improvements. But the bottom line is, Tim, we want to move on. We have got to support this effort. We have got to do it in an enthusiastic and bipartisan way.''

While there are still those who will not agree to what Mr. Bush is seeking, they are probably a minority even among Democrats, and many will vote for an alternate war powers resolution as a political gesture, several senators predicted.

One holdout is Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, who repeated today on ''Face the Nation'' on CBS that war must be a last resort and that he would not favor a resolution unless United Nations inspectors were sent back to Iraq and were rebuffed.

On the same program, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, a hawk on Iraq, said a formula he is offering with Senator Evan Bayh, Democrat of Indiana, Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, and Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, would prevail over the alternatives.

''I believe there will be at least 70 votes in favor, and it could go as high as 80 or 90,'' Mr. Lieberman said.

But a Republican who supports the president, Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, said, ''There will be substantial opposition.''

''I think in the end, the president will get what he is asking for, and I think it will be a very strong vote,'' Mr. Santorum said. ''Hopefully it will be over 60, 65 votes. But I suspect Senator Kennedy represents a significant body of people in the Senate, and I think it will be closer in the Senate than it is in the House.''

In acquiescing, the Democrats are recognizing the political realities as presented in public opinion polls, Senator Bayh said.

''The majority of the American people tend to trust the Republican Party more on issues involving national security and defense than they do the Democratic Party,'' he said. ''We need to work to improve our image on that score by taking a more aggressive posture with regard to Iraq, empowering the president.''
