

THREATS AND RESPONSES: A VOTE OF 'NO'; Los Angeles Council Adopts Resolution Against Iraq War
By Barbara Whitaker
Feb. 22, 2003

With the gallery packed with peace advocates, the City Council passed a resolution today opposing unilateral war against Iraq and urging President Bush to employ all diplomatic options to deal with the crisis.

After the 9-to-4 vote, Los Angeles became the country's largest city to oppose such a war, joining more than 100 other cities and counties including Chicago, Philadelphia and Detroit. The Council had been deadlocked on the issue on Tuesday, but the measure passed today after a member changed her vote and a member who had been absent voted in favor.

Council members who opposed the measure had several concerns, among them that it was not the Council's business to take such a stand.

''We're losing focus of what we're paid to do,'' Councilman Dennis P. Zine said. ''We are armed with nothing other than what we read in the newspaper and see on television, and we're going to tell those who are more informed what to do?''

Mr. Zine, who said he did not support a war, said he was also concerned about the message such resolutions send to those in the military.

''I don't want this to turn into a Vietnam mentality,'' he said.

Councilman Eric Garcetti, the sponsor of the resolution, said the measure was a response to petitions from a growing number of city residents opposed to a war. About 300 antiwar demonstrators came to City Hall to support the motion.

''They've sent a message to our president that he is out of touch with the people,'' said Suzanne Thompson, a local director of Neighbors for Peace and Justice, a Los Angeles group that is campaigning against war with Iraq. ''They had to act at City Council because the Congressional leaders didn't have the courage to say no to war.''

But Mr. Garcetti said that what ultimately pushed him to act was the possibility of cutbacks in the police and fire departments if the government spent billions to go to war.

''While our federal government spends a lot of time looking at the foreign policy implications of war,'' Mr. Garcetti said, ''it's imperative for local government to look at the domestic ramifications.''

''We need to take care of our security needs here in Los Angeles, which are woefully inadequate, before we set out abroad,'' he said.

The Council voted unanimously to support a part of the resolution urging the government to provide additional money for better equipping police officers and firefighters who respond first to disasters.

Councilwoman Jan Perry, who had opposed the measure on Tuesday, added an amendment seeking more aid for the homeless, nearly 20 percent of whom are veterans.

Such sentiments pleased the audience. ''I'm very proud of the Council for thinking globally and locally,'' said Randy Herr, a demonstrator. ''If we go to war and it costs billions, that is money that is being robbed from our cities, our schools, our health care and our people.''

A handful of demonstrators argued that it was time for the United States to act against Iraq. Bob Zirgulis, who identified himself as the founder and president of the locally based International Human Rights Watch, carried fliers with Saddam Hussein's picture in a bulls-eye.

''In the 1930's, there was a peace movement and Hitler said that was one of his greatest allies,'' Mr. Zirgulis said. ''My feeling is if Hitler would have been killed in the 30's, millions would have been saved, and I believe the same about Saddam Hussein.''

But demonstrators were overwhelmingly opposed to the war, with one father and son dressed in ripped clothing, bandages and fake blood.

''I think that today there are two superpowers,'' said the father, Fred Greissing, who was carrying his 9-year-old son, Anthony. ''One is the United States and the other is public opinion, and I hope my feeble theatrical display might just save some Iraqi child a broken arm, third-degree burns or death.''
