


THREATS AND RESPONSES: ISTANBUL; Turkey May Reconsider Vote On Its Role in Iraq Invasion
By Frank Bruni
March 18, 2003

Turkish leaders signaled tonight that they were giving fresh, urgent consideration to United States officials' requests for Turkey's cooperation in an invasion of northern Iraq, resurrecting American hopes that had been fading fast.

After a late-night meeting of the senior officials of the Turkish government, the spokesman for the Turkish president hinted that a resolution to provide military assistance to the United States might be brought anew before the Turkish Parliament in the next few days.

''Turkey has decided to take urgent steps to preserve its national interests,'' the spokesman, Tacan Ildem, told reporters in Ankara, where the meeting took place.

Mr. Ildem did not say what those steps would be, but political experts and Turkish officials said he was almost certainly referring to a new vote by the Parliament in the next few days.

On March 1, the Parliament narrowly rejected a resolution to authorize moving American ground troops into southeastern Turkey, which borders northern Iraq. Those troops were to form a northern front that could expedite American military success in Iraq.

Until today, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who publicly supported the resolution, had said he would not resubmit it to Parliament until next week, if then.

Mr. Erdogan had also indicated that any parliamentary consideration of permission for American war planes to use Turkish air space would have to wait that long.

Tonight's developments suggested that Mr. Erdogan had dramatically accelerated the timetable for a new vote. The Turkish state-run news agency reported that he would hold an emergency cabinet meeting on Tuesday to discuss the issue further.

In addition to Mr. Erdogan, President Ahmet Necdet Sezer and Gen. Hilmi Ozkok, head of the Turkish armed forces, took part in the meeting.

But the outcome of a new vote remains uncertain, and permission to move American troops onto Turkish soil and to use Turkish air space requires parliamentary approval.

''The fact that Turkey's leaders have met and reached the conclusion that this needs to be considered urgently is positive,'' said an American official familiar with the negotiations between American and Turkish officials.

But, the official added, there were two ''huge qualifications.''

''We don't pretend to judge when the government will act, or how a vote would turn out in Parliament,'' the official said.

A senior official with Mr. Erdogan's Justice and Development Party said that a vote could turn out in favor of the resolution this time, because circumstances have changed.

An American invasion of Iraq now seems inevitable, the official said, so Turkish lawmakers would be deciding whether Turkey wanted a role in it and, as a result, a greater say in its aftermath.

Last time, the official said, lawmakers may have felt that a vote in favor of the resolution was an endorsement of an avoidable war. Public opinion in Turkey is overwhelmingly against an American-led military invasion of Iraq.

Bush administration officials have offered Turkey at least $6 billion in new aid for cooperation with American military efforts, but Turkey has additional motivations to help the United States.

The Turkish government wants to be able to make sure that establishment of an autonomous Kurdish state in northern Iraq is not a consequence of a war. Turkish officials fear that such a development could lead to separatist demands among Kurds in southeastern Turkey.

Turkish officials also want to halt any flow of refugees into southern Turkey.

The Justice and Development Party official said those concerns were among the issues to which Mr. Ildem was referring when he said ''national interests.'' The official added that those concerns could best be addressed by Turkish involvement in a military campaign.

The official said Parliament might reconsider the earlier resolution or, instead, a more limited measure to allow use of Turkish air space.

Mr. Ildem said the government intended to act in accordance with earlier recommendations by Turkey's National Security Council, which is perceived to support military cooperation.
