

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ALLY IN MIDDLE EUROPE; Anti-Hussein Iraqis in Hungary For Training by U.S. Military
By Peter S. Green
Feb. 19, 2003

Behind the high wall of concrete slats and barbed wire that surrounds the Hungarian Air Force base in this small southwestern town, the first group of Iraqi volunteers is training to join an American army that may invade Iraq.

The arrival of the Iraqis, shrouded in official secrecy, has brought the politics of the Middle East to this town of 3,000 people, mainly farmers and Hungarian military families.

Trucks and vans with white United States Army license plates rush down Taszar's few roads, pushing aside the local residents sedately riding their bicycles. Construction workers are finding well-paying jobs on the base, and the town's half-dozen bars and grocery stores are sporting new coats of paint.

At day's end, the streets are filled with Hungarian soldiers and officers in uniform returning home from the base, but Americans and Iraqis are nowhere to be seen. Under orders from Washington, the Army will say little about the Iraqi volunteers.

In a Hungarian officers' club just outside the gates of the Taszar base, a United States Army spokesman, Maj. Bob Stern, said the Americans were too busy training the Iraqis to introduce them to journalists.

Despite rumors, he said, the Iraqis are not being trained as hit squads to assassinate President Saddam Hussein. Instead, the major said, volunteers selected from Iraqi opposition groups are learning to act as liaisons with American military units, translating for them and guiding them in patrols, combat missions and the task of administering and rebuilding Iraq after a possible invasion.

Maj. Gen. David W. Barno, in command of the training program, said recently that the Iraqis might also serve as a local police force in areas captured by the Americans.

The Hungarians have some different ideas. ''I've heard they're here and they are training them to be spies,'' said Gergely Varga, 18, a high school student.

Kornelia Hamrak, an elementary school teacher, said, ''We were told officially they are training to be translators, but I suspect that something else is going on.''

Americans first came to Taszar in 1995, when it was their main logistical base for the multinational peacekeeping force in Bosnia. Now, Washington has permission from Hungary to train up to 3,000 Iraqis to accompany a United States force in Iraq. Neither Hungarians nor Americans will say how many Iraqis are here, or how long their training will last.

Although the local police recently handed out leaflets telling residents what to do if they discovered suspicious packages, and prosecutors are investigating the origins of a rumor earlier this month that anthrax had been found near Taszar, few residents seem to believe that their town will be the target of terrorists.

Still, not everyone welcomes this disruption to the town's sleepy routine. ''If you work at the base you get more money, but you have to work harder,'' said a 49-year old construction worker who gave his first name as Gyula. He said that his neighbor worked on the base, but that he was not interested.

The debate in Central European parliaments over Iraq is also echoing through the beer halls and offices of Taszar and the nearby county seat in Kaposvar. The chairman of the county council, Istvan Gyenesei, an appointee of the Socialist government, said Hungary had an obligation as a new member of NATO to support the United States.

''Let me tell you a proverb we have,'' he said. ''If you plant a tree in the springtime, you must rake the leaves in the autumn.'' Even so, he said he sympathized with most Hungarians' aversion to war.

Karoly Szita, the mayor of Kaposvar and a member of the rightist opposition Fidesz Party, agrees that Hungary has a responsibility to the United States, but he warned that ''our support is not infinite so that when big brother tells us to do something, little brother says O.K.''
