

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE ALLIES; Australia Is Noncommittal On Scope of Any Role in Iraq
By Jane Perlez
Dec. 14, 2002

The United States deputy secretary of state, Richard L. Armitage, said here today that America expected Australia to contribute to any military effort against Iraq that Washington might undertake. But he stopped short of specifying what the assistance might be, and his Australian hosts were not specific either.

The fairly muted statements by Mr. Armitage and the Australians appeared to indicate that despite the strength of the alliance between the two countries, Australia would be contributing less to any Iraqi campaign than either side had envisioned a few months ago.

The October terrorist attack on Bali in which nearly 90 Australians were killed cooled the interest that Prime Minister John Howard showed some months ago for sending Australian troops to fight with Americans in an Iraqi campaign.

''I can't imagine any great endeavor in the world going on without some sort of collaboration between Australia and the United States,'' Mr. Armitage said during a day of talks that was part of an Asian tour that has been dominated by discussion of Iraq and North Korea.

The Australian foreign minister, Alexander Downer, said today that Mr. Armitage had not made any requests of Australia. Australian defense analysts said it was likely that groups of up to 150 Australian special forces would serve in rotation in a campaign in Iraq, as three such groups did in Afghanistan.

The analysts said that Mr. Howard, an ardent supporter of the Bush administration, was constrained by domestic public opinion and the limitations of the Australian military at a time of growing terrorist threat in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Howard conceded as much in a major speech here last month. The Prime Minister endorsed all the Bush arguments about Iraq, including the notion that Saddam Hussein ''has a long history of giving support to terrorist groups.''

But Mr. Howard then said, ''I have indicated it has been made clear that any Australian contribution in a new theater such as Iraq would need to be within our resources and not detract from immediate defense and national security needs.''

Australia already has two frigates deployed in the Persian Gulf to help enforce the United Nations arms embargo against Iraq.

In a more enthusiastic mood several months ago, Mr. Howard raised the possibility of sending an armored brigade of Australian soldiers. But that idea, which was never fully described by the prime minister, was soon dropped.

When the Bush administration then asked the Howard government to consider contributing a battalion of about 1,200 soldiers, the informal request was considered by Australia but eventually turned down. Washington does not need Australian ''boots on the ground'' for a war against Iraq for military reasons, Australian officials said, but sought such a commitment for reasons of moral support.

Along with the Blair government in Britain, the conservative government in Australia is seen as one of the most likely military partners of the United States if there is a war in Iraq. A few Australian soldiers, along with several hundred British troops, were included by the United States in a military exercise at the as-Sayliyah base in Qatar this week.

The Howard government would prefer a United Nations mandate for a war against Iraq, but is prepared to back the United States without one, according to officials in the capital, Canberra.

Joining the United States without the cover of the United Nations could severely harm Australia's standing among its Asian neighbors, particularly Indonesia and Malaysia with their large Muslim populations.

Since the attack in Bali, Australians have grown far more wary of sending the Australian military far overseas. Opinion polls show that Australians are also beginning to question the wisdom of unseating Saddam Hussein, in part because they now see themselves as targets for Al Qaeda. Osama bin Laden has mentioned Australia as a nation hostile to the interests of Islam.
