

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AFRICA; Rumsfeld Seeking New Allies To Oppose Al Qaeda and Iraq
By Marc Lacey
Dec. 11, 2002

In another sign of Africa's increased importance to United States military planners, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld arrived in Eritrea today on a three-country tour aimed at courting allies considered essential to the fight against Al Qaeda and to possible military action against Iraq.

''We know there are Al Qaeda in this area, in several countries, in varying numbers,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said on the flight from Washington to Eritrea, a country on the Horn of Africa that has sought mightily to bring United States troops to its soil. ''We also know to the extent we put pressure on them in one place, they tend to be disrupted and have to find other locations.''

The recent terrorist bombing in Kenya, which is widely believed to have been orchestrated by Al Qaeda, highlights the importance of a region that had previously seen its strategic role in the world fade after the end of the cold war. Now, with Qaeda operatives scattering and the United States looking for the broadest possible array of military allies, African governments are finding Washington increasingly receptive.

After meeting with President Isaias Afewerki of Eritrea today, Mr. Rumsfeld left for Eritrea's bitter rival to the south, Ethiopia, which fought a two-year border war with Eritrea that ended in 2000.

Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia has just returned from a meeting with President Bush at the White House, which was also attended by President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya. Analysts suspect that one reason Eritrea is so eager to court the American military is to outflank Ethiopia, which is considered one of Washington's key allies in the region.

After his meeting with Mr. Rumsfeld today, the Eritrean president vowed to stand by the United States in its fight against terrorism. ''We are not offering anything to get anything from the United States,'' Mr. Afewerki said. ''We have very limited resources, but we are willing and prepared to use these resources in any way that is useful to combat terrorism.''

In recent weeks, Eritrea's lobbyists in Washington have sought to play up their country's importance in the region. They point out that Eritrea -- half Christian and half Muslim -- has resisted joining the Arab League and the Organization of Islamic States and would have no qualms about assisting the United States in an attack against Iraq.

Eritrea is directly across the Red Sea from Saudi Arabia and Yemen, with deep-water ports on the sea, and ''a military partnership between the United States and Eritrea is sensible and well timed,'' said a recent position paper distributed by Greenberg Traurig, a Washington law firm working for Eritrea.

The country has been shunned in the past because of its repressive government, which jailed numerous opposition leaders, student activists and independent journalists last year. Two Eritreans who work at the American Embassy in Asmara, the capital, have been jailed for the past year for what the Eritrean government says is subversive activity. Repeated calls for their release have been ignored by Eritrean leaders.

Mr. Rumsfeld said human rights issues were among those he discussed with Mr. Afewerki. ''We are frankly hoping that the relationship will evolve and strengthen and grow in the weeks and months and years ahead,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Another stop on Mr. Rumsfeld's tour will be Djibouti, a former French colony that sits at the mouth of the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, between Eritrea and the lawless state of Somalia. There are already more than 1,000 American troops, mostly Special Operations forces and marines, stationed in Djibouti. They are there to assist the Qaeda operation and, if necessary, the offensive against Iraq.

Mr. Rumsfeld will wind up his trip in Qatar, where the American military's Central Command has put in place a new forward headquarters for the Persian Gulf region.
