
Students Get a Seminar With the Iraqi Envoy
By Karen W. Arenson
March 4, 2003

When students head to college, they expect to learn about the world. But few expect the kind of front-row seat on world affairs that a dozen Lehigh University students had yesterday in a two-hour meeting with the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammed A. Aldouri.

The students -- a mix of Americans and foreign students, graduate students and undergraduates, pro-war and antiwar -- listened respectfully as the ambassador described his view that America wants war and Iraq wants peace.

When the students had their turn, they asked him about Iraq's human rights record, whether President Bush should be invited to address the Iraqi people directly, and if war was inevitable.

''You say you hope you can avoid war,'' said Patrick Schmid, a computer science major from Germany, marching up to the question on everybody's mind. ''Will there be war?''

The answer was not as direct as the question.

''I cannot say that the war is not coming,'' Mr. Aldouri said in accented English. ''I can say only that war is avoidable. There are a lot of nations asking for peaceful solutions. I hope you will pressure your government; there is no reason for war.''

The ambassador seemed to relish the give and take at the Iraqi mission in a town house on East 79th Street, just off Fifth Avenue. He said that before becoming a diplomat, he spent 30 years as a professor at Baghdad University, where he specialized in international law and human rights.

At times, the meeting resembled a college seminar; the participants sat at a large table in an ornate room decorated with a chandelier and a portrait of a smiling Saddam Hussein. The discussion was civil and calm; there were no peace signs or armbands in sight, no raised voices or strident statements.

The visit was arranged by Bill Hunter, director of Lehigh's office of international students and scholars, who oversees the roughly 500 international students at Lehigh, a campus with 6,200 students in Bethlehem, Pa. Mr. Hunter has taken students to the Pentagon, to NATO headquarters in Virginia and to meetings at the United Nations.

Last week, to give his students a more direct taste of Iraqi views, he called Mr. Aldouri's office and proposed a visit. Less than 24 hours later, the ambassador's office agreed, and later accepted Mr. Hunter's proposal that reporters for The New York Times and ABC News also attend.

Some of the students agreed with the ambassador that there should be no war, but few seemed to buy many of his other arguments.

''He was really good at putting an Iraqi spin on things,'' said Roberto Escalante, a Lehigh junior from Mexico who is majoring in mechanical engineering.

As a Mexican, Mr. Escalante said, he understands what it feels like to be the underdog, ''to be manipulated by another country.'' But he said he believed the ambassador was trying to shift blame away from Iraq onto other people.

''I was a little disappointed,'' said Nur-E Farzana Rahman, a junior majoring in economics and journalism who is editorial page editor of the Lehigh student newspaper. ''I went in hoping there would be a way to bridge the gap between American and Muslim cultures,'' said Ms. Rahman, an American citizen born in Bangladesh, who said she supported President Bush. ''But I didn't see a desire for change on his part,'' she added, referring to the ambassador.

Perhaps the students' biggest surprise was the ABC reporter's brief interview with the ambassador when their session was over.

The interview covered some of the same ground, but the questions were louder, the exchange more confrontational.

''I felt bad for the ambassador,'' Mr. Escalante said afterward. ''I always like to keep things cordial.''

For Ms. Rahman, it offered a different kind of lesson.

''I was watching and wondering,'' she said. ''I was wondering, 'Will I be able to do this?' ''
