SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ETHNIC ISSUES

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ETHNIC ISSUES; Rival Iraqi Kurdish Groups Meet to Resolve Differences
By Craig S. Smith
Oct. 5, 2002

See the article in its original context from October 5, 2002, Section A, Page 12Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
Ethnic Kurds opened a regional parliament meeting in northern Iraq today, hoping to unify rival factions whose infighting has repeatedly foiled Kurdish attempts to consolidate power over their traditional homeland.

The parliament, which has not convened since 1996 because of factional fighting, is expected to lay the groundwork for a unified government in northern Iraq and to endorse a draft constitution that would formalize a Kurdish federal state based in Kirkuk, whose province holds important oil fields and is now controlled by Saddam Hussein. The parliament met in Erbil, a Kurdish-controlled city about 60 miles northwest of Kirkuk.

''This is a very special day for the Kurdish people,'' a senior Kurdish official, Hoshiyar Zebari, was quoted by Reuters as saying. ''It will mean burying discord and disunity and turning a new leaf of harmony and prosperity.''

The Kurds have enjoyed self-rule in northern Iraq for more than 10 years, thanks to United States and British protection. With the possibility that the region is now approaching a historic turning point, the group is hoping to make that autonomy permanent. That means overcoming centuries of tribal division.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Kurds, the largest ethnic group in the world without their own country, were briefly promised independence in the Treaty of Sèvres after World War I. Instead, their lands were carved up between Turkey, Syria, Iraq and Iran, in part because the tribes were already in disarray.

Northern Iraq's Kurds have had a turbulent history since then, fighting against Baghdad or among themselves. President Hussein's forces attacked them in 1988, killing an estimated 5,000 Kurds when his helicopters dropped lethal gas on one town.

After the 1991 Persian Gulf war, the Kurds responded to American calls to rise up against Mr. Hussein, taking control of northern Iraq, including Kirkuk. But they were routed by Iraqi helicopter gunships, which the American military had allowed Mr. Hussein to retain.

The United States and Britain finally responded by creating a no-flight zone north of the 36th parallel, allowing most of the Kurds to return to their homes. Two Kurdish groups have governed the area since then -- the Kurdistan Democratic Party, led by Massoud Barzani, in the northwest, and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, led by Jalal Talabani, in the southeast.

Elections to the first regional parliament in 1992 ended in a deadlock between the two sides, and the parliament never exercised real power. Fighting soon broke out over control of trade revenue and other matters. A United States-mediated peace accord in 1998 called for two main parties to reconvene parliament, but squabbling between the two sides kept that from happening until now.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Both Mr. Barzani and Mr. Talabani are attending the assembly, which has as its guest of honor Danielle Mitterrand, widow of the late French president and a supporter of the Kurds since the gulf war.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell sent a cable that was read at the opening ceremony, saying, ''I am proud you are among the United States' partners in the fight against tyranny and injustice and that you share our vision of Iraq's future.''

Iraq's four million Kurds are the largest organized opposition group in the country and, with tens of thousands of men under arms, could be a significant force in any ground war with Mr. Hussein's forces.

Turkey, a member of NATO and a United States ally, has fought a 15-year war against Kurdish separatists in its territory bordering Iraq. It opposes increased autonomy among Iraqi Kurds, fearing that it could spark a revival of Kurdish nationalism inside Turkey.

For now, Iraq's Kurds will have to overcome their own obstacles.

''Hopefully, we can unify the ministries dealing with public services, such as health, as a first step toward a common government,'' said Ahmed Bamarni, the Paris representative of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan faction.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions