SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

A NATION AT WAR: INTELLIGENCE

A NATION AT WAR: INTELLIGENCE; Allies Think Iraqi Leader Eluded Death In U.S. Strike
By David E. Sanger and David Johnston
March 24, 2003

American and British intelligence officials have concluded that Saddam Hussein probably survived the attack on his compound on Wednesday night, although they believe he may have suffered minor injuries, according to officials who have reviewed recent intelligence reports.

''He was there, we believe, and he made it out,'' said one official of the military coalition. ''How he made it out is still a mystery.''

Even as most officials have concluded that Mr. Hussein is likely to be alive, the Central Intelligence Agency has so far not determined his fate with certainty, intelligence officials said today. Nor has the agency been able to ascertain whether anyone else was killed or injured in the raid on a residential compound in Baghdad.

Nonetheless, when President Bush landed on the South Lawn of the White House early this afternoon, he referred to Mr. Hussein in the present tense, telling reporters ''I know that Saddam Hussein is losing control of his country.''
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Later in the day, officials noted that Mr. Bush made no reference to the possibility that he had been killed or injured, a departure from the stance the White House took on Thursday and Friday, when it noted -- but did not confirm -- rumors that Mr. Hussein or his sons had been killed.

Mr. Bush was not the only one with a changed tone today.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld seemed to reflect a similar assessment when he was asked in an interview today on CNN if Mr. Hussein was alive.

''We have to assume he is,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''There's no question but that there were senior Iraqi regime leadership in the compound, which we attacked several nights ago, and the intelligence reports suggest that the attacks were successful in terms of hitting targets.

''What is not knowable from the air or from long distance is precisely who was where in that compound at any given moment when the weapons actually struck,'' he added.

In Britain, Mike O'Brien, one of that country's senior foreign policy officials, said, ''After the event we received information Saddam Hussein left the area in an ambulance.'' But he said he was still not entirely confident of the intelligence.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
In fact, American intelligence officials have received a welter of conflicting reports from Iraqis in Baghdad and from officials of other countries about the status of the Iraqi leader, his two sons and several key aides who were believed to be in the compound that night.

Some reports suggest that he survived, others indicate that he was killed or sustained serious injuries and was carried from the rubble on a stretcher. But none of the intelligence reports seem authoritative, a senior intelligence official said.

''There's lots of stuff in both directions,'' the official said. ''But there's nothing that would be convincing either way.''

Absent concrete evidence, senior Bush administration officials have apparently opted to believe that Mr. Hussein survived the attack, a belief reinforced by signs that the central government, while impaired, has continued to exert control over the country, officials said.

''There's more chatter in the system suggesting central control than there was a few days ago,'' one senior coalition official said today.

In his comments today, Mr. Bush appeared to rule out any additional offer of exile for Mr. Hussein, a possibility American officials had left open when the president issued an ultimatum giving him until Wednesday night to leave Iraq or face imminent attack.

''He had his chance to go into exile,'' Mr. Bush said, adding, ''He chose not to go into exile.''

Two F-117 stealth fighter-bombers each dropped two 2,000-pound bombs that were intended to penetrate the compound's bunker. Almost simultaneously, about 40 cruise missiles struck other locations within the compound in what American officials hoped would be a knockout blow at the outset of the war.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions