SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Hussein Issues Decree to Ban Weapons of Mass Destruction
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 15, 2003

Waiting until almost the last possible moment, Saddam Hussein complied today with one demand of the United Nations weapons inspectors by issuing a presidential decree banning the construction or import of weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Hussein acted only hours before the two top United Nations arms inspectors delivered an updated report to the Security Council on Iraq's cooperation since weapons inspections began anew here, under threat of war, in November.

The Iraqi government offered no official response tonight to the report, which credited Iraq for generally better cooperation but said that it still had not delivered hard evidence that it was free of banned weapons. But one Iraqi official said the report was ''less than we hoped for.''

''It was fair, but not fair enough,'' the official said.

Over the next few days, the measure of how near an American-led attack might be will likely turn to the physical presence of the United Nations inspectors in Iraq. Yasuhiro Ueki, the spokesman for the inspectors, said there was no indication they would be asked to leave, ''not as yet, for sure.''
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
''We are operating on the assumption our inspectors will be allowed to continue,'' he said.

In a visit here last weekend, Hans Blix, the chief inspector for biological and chemical weapons, told the inspectors that anyone who wanted to leave for fear of hostilities breaking out could do so. It was unclear tonight how many inspectors, if any, had departed after Mr. Blix gave them the option. But the number of inspectors here at present is reported to be about 90, down from 110 at their greatest strength.

With Mr. Hussein's decree today, Iraq appeared to be trying to avoid a repeat of the last report by Mr. Blix, in late January, in which he presented a largely negative picture of Iraq's willingness to cooperate with the United Nations inspectors.

Since last week, Iraq has offered several concessions to the inspectors to help influence today's report, as well as members of the Security Council, in the hope they will continue to push for more inspections as an alternative to an American-led attack.

After long wrangling, Iraq first offered several scientists to be interviewed in private by inspectors and then said it would allow the flight of U-2 surveillance planes over Iraq to help the inspectors in their work.

Today's decree by Mr. Hussein marked a third concession, a largely symbolic gesture the inspectors have long sought as a statement of Iraq's commitment to disarmament. In the decree, Mr. Hussein repeated his claim that Iraq no longer had any weapons of mass destruction and imposed a ban on their manufacture or importation.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
The Iraqi leader instructed his ministers to put the decree into effect and to ''punish those who don't adhere to it.''

In his speech before the Security Council, Mr. Powell dismissed the recent concessions as merely procedural points and repeated his contention, shared by the inspectors themselves, that Iraq has yet to offer full cooperation on the larger question of whether it still has weapons of mass destruction.

Mr. Hussein's decree was immediately and unanimously approved in special session by the 250-member Iraqi National Assembly, though barely a word was said about the legislation itself.

The session, to which hundreds of foreign journalists were invited, was devoted instead to speeches denying that Iraq has weapons of mass destruction and condemning the United States for threatening an attack.

''The land of Iraq will be a graveyard for all aggressors,'' said Saddoun Hammadi, the Assembly's speaker. ''On our side, there are people with high morale, highly united, believing in God and our homeland, fighting behind our courageous leader. On the other side, there is a front which is based on lies and is condemned by public opinion around the world.''
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions