SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 8, 2003

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN OVERVIEW: MARCH 8, 2003; Baghdad Destroys Missiles, Demands Concessions and Exploits Allies' Rift
By Robert D. McFadden
March 9, 2003

With a nine-day war clock ticking over Baghdad, Iraq moved on two fronts: To undercut the American rationale for invasion, it resumed the destruction of its missiles. And apparently seeking to widen divisions among major world powers, it fired a blunderbuss of demands at the United Nations.

THE WEAPONS -- Iraq said that under United Nations supervision, it had destroyed 6 more Al Samoud 2 missiles, bringing to 40 the number eliminated, about a third of its 120 missiles, including 20 in various stages of construction. They were banned after the Persian Gulf war in 1991 because they exceeded a 93-mile range limit.

Two United Nations weapons inspectors on Friday had cited ''substantial'' disarmament progress and no signs of a renewed nuclear arms program, but also said Baghdad had not answered many questions about chemical and biological weapons, and had far to go in a disarmament process that might take months.

THE DEMANDS -- In a statement issued after a cabinet meeting and in editorials in the state-controlled press, Iraq glossed over the inspectors' concerns, played up its disarmament progress and said it was now sufficiently free of weapons of mass destruction to warrant the cancellation of economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations a decade ago. It demanded that they be lifted.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
There were other demands: that the United Nations should strip Israel of its weapons of mass destruction; that Israel should be forced, under Security Council resolutions, to withdraw from occupied Palestinian territories; and that the United Nations should formally brand the United States and Britain ''liars.''

OTHER VIEWS -- President Bush, in his weekly radio address, scoffed at Iraq's destruction of the weapons as ''a public show'' involving ''a few prohibited missiles,'' and said President Hussein, far from disarming, ''has ordered the continued production of the very same type of missiles.''

United Nations diplomats were saying Britain was a bit more interested than the United States in finding a compromise to pass a new Security Council resolution that would give Iraq until March 17 to completely disarm or face an American-led invasion. A vote could take place as early as Tuesday.

France, Russia, Germany and China oppose the measure, which was introduced by Britain with the support of the United States and Spain. Washington seemed determined to follow its own course anyway, ready to oppose a compromise that would extend the deadline, and ready to invade Iraq whether or not the resolution was passed.

READINESS -- Cargo ships carrying 72 Apache and Kiowa helicopters of the 101st Airborne Division arrived in Kuwait, and ships with the unit's Chinook and Blackhawk choppers were expected to arrive tomorrow, American military commanders said. The division's troops flew to Kuwait last week.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
The Apaches carry armor-piercing Hellfire missiles. The Kiowas are smaller surveillance and scouting craft. If war comes, the helicopters are expected to play major roles in the assault. Their pilots will undergo training to get used to desert flying.

TERRORISTS -- Looking ahead, the Central Intelligence Agency warns that terrorists based in Iraq -- small groups affiliated with Al Qaeda and operating independently of Mr. Hussein's forces -- are planning attacks on allied forces during or after any invasion. Critics question Washington's claim that Baghdad has tolerated or supported terrorist followers of Osama bin Laden.

The recent capture of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, Al Qaeda's chief tactician, has given American officials new hope of tracking Mr. bin Laden and disrupting terrorist operations. But the interrogation techniques used on him have raised tactical and moral questions. Officials say that physical torture is not being used, but that sleep deprivation and temporarily withholding food and access to medical attention are acceptable, given the stakes. Robert D. McFadden
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions