SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

British Aide Says Toppling Hussein Is Not a Goal for London
By Suzanne Kapner
Aug. 23, 2002

See the article in its original context from August 23, 2002, Section A, Page 8Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
Reinstating United Nations weapons inspectors not the removal of Saddam Hussein -- is the centerpiece of Britain's policy toward Iraq, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said today.

The statement, made on the BBC radio program ''Today,'' underscored the differences between the United States, which has made the removal of Mr. Hussein a top priority, and Britain, its closest ally in the campaign against terrorism.

Prime Minister Tony Blair is facing growing opposition to the use of military force in Iraq from within his own Labor Party as well as from the Conservative and Liberal opposition, and some cabinet members have called for an open debate on the issue.

President Bush, who is also encountering some internal opposition to military action, has said the return of United Nations weapons inspectors to Iraq would be inadequate. Removing Mr. Hussein remains an important goal of American foreign policy, though Mr. Bush said on Wednesday that he was open to nonmilitary ways of achieving that.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Mr. Straw, in contrast, said today that the return of the weapons inspectors would be the best way of reducing the risk posed by Mr. Hussein and his presumed access to weapons of mass destruction, though he did not rule out removing the Iraqi leader by force if necessary.

''If my prayers were answered,'' Mr. Straw said, Mr. Hussein would be ''removed by divine intervention'' tomorrow. ''But,'' he continued, removing him ''is not an object of British foreign policy.''

World leaders have increasingly voiced their resistance to an invasion of Iraq, and Mr. Straw's comments served as another setback to Mr. Bush's efforts to build a coalition to oust Mr. Hussein.

In Britain, the growing dissent comes ahead of an important Labor Party conference next month. Mr. Blair has already been accused of lacking resolve when it comes to standing up to the United States. A recent video by the rock singer George Michael for his single ''Shoot the Dog'' portrays Mr. Bush as a cowboy and Mr. Blair as his pet poodle.

Now Mr. Blair faces a potential revolt from within party ranks. Several Labor members of Parliament are planning an antiwar rally on the eve of the conference. Others are threatening to visit Baghdad and meet with Mr. Hussein, as George Galloway, another member of Parliament, did last month.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Polls have showed that Britons remain divided over the matter. But over the course of the summer, support for an invasion has dwindled, analysts said. A recent poll in The Daily Telegraph suggested that only 19 percent of the people would support joining forces with the United States in military action against Iraq.

As in the United States, some of Britain's top military experts are sounding a cautious note. Sir Michael Quinlan, a former senior official at the Ministry of Defense, writing in The Financial Times, called an assault against Iraq an ''unnecessary and precarious gamble, unless there emerges new evidence against Mr. Hussein altogether more compelling than any yet disclosed.''

James P. Rubin, who served as assistant secretary of state in the Clinton administration and who is now a visiting professor at the London School of Economics, said Mr. Blair ''has tried to avoid choosing between Europe and America on Iraq and a number of other issues. He is trying to bridge a very difficult gap between the Bush administration's focus on the regime change and the broader European focus on the weapons of mass destructions.''
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions