SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: POSTWAR GOALS

THREATS AND RESPONSES: POSTWAR GOALS; American Officials Disclose 2-Year Plan to Rebuild Iraq
By James Dao
Feb. 12, 2003

In the first detailed public discussion of the Bush administration's plans for a postwar Iraq, senior officials told Congress today that it would take more than two years for the United States military to transfer control of Iraq's government to Iraqi leaders.

The officials, seeking to demonstrate to skeptical senators that the administration's planning was advanced, outlined steps for administering and democratizing Iraq after the ouster of Saddam Hussein.

Those would include finding and destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, eliminating terrorist cells, starting economic reconstruction, purging Baathist leaders from the bureaucracy, protecting oil fields and securing the country's borders -- particularly with Iran. They would be carried out by American and coalition forces.

The United States would also play a leading role in rebuilding Iraq's oil industry. This could cost as much as $10 billion if Mr. Hussein follows through on his threats to destroy oil wells, pipelines and refineries, as he did in Kuwait during the the Persian Gulf war of 1991, the officials said.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
If Mr. Hussein ''utterly destroys'' Iraq's oil industry, ''it will make for a horrific reconstruction project,'' said one of the officials, Douglas J. Feith, the undersecretary of defense for policy.

Although the United States Central Command, under the leadership of Gen. Tommy R. Franks, would oversee Iraq during the military occupation, the officials said they were not looking at the postwar occupation of Japan under General Douglas MacArthur -- which lasted seven years -- as a model.

''The United States would have a commitment to leave as soon as possible,'' Mr. Feith said.

Mr. Feith's words were tempered, however, by his colleague, Marc Grossman, the undersecretary of state for political affairs, who told the senators that even under good circumstances, it would probably take two years or more for the military to transfer control of many ministries to Iraqi officials.

To speed the growth of an indigenous, Democratic-leaning Iraqi leadership, the United States would encourage Iraqi exiles, bureaucrats, professionals and local leaders to form committees to assist General Franks in several important ways: helping administer the bureaucracy, revising Iraq's laws and drafting a new constitution, the officials said.

''We will demonstrate to the Iraqi people and the world that the United States wants to liberate, not occupy or control their economic resources,'' Mr. Grossman said.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
But the two officials also said the Bush administration had ruled out plans for helping Iraqi exiles create a provisional government.

The two faced skeptical senators from both parties, who sharply questioned whether the administration had done enough to prepare for the aftermath of a war. And despite their efforts to release new details of the administration's planning, they were chastised by lawmakers for not providing enough information about costs and timetables for reconstruction. On several occasions, Mr. Feith said the cost of rebuilding Iraq was ''unknowable,'' because it was impossible to predict the severity of war-related damage.

''We have a right to know,'' said Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, the ranking Democrat.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, called Mr. Grossman's assertion that the United States could transfer control of the government to the Iraqi people in two years ''naïve.''

''I think it's better to be upfront with the American people,'' Mr. Dodd said. ''It's going to be very expensive and take a long, long time, particularly if we're doing it ourselves.''

Senators from both parties said that the sheer cost and magnitude of rebuilding Iraq would require coalition assistance -- and they questioned whether tensions with France and Germany had complicated postwar cooperation. ''Aren't we wiser to bring our coalition partners along?'' asked Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska.

Mr. Grossman said the United States had been consulting closely with numerous allies about reconstruction, though he declined to name them.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions