SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXNEW YORK
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

A NATION AT WAR: NEW YORK

A NATION AT WAR: NEW YORK; Baghdad Bombing Brings Back Memories of 9/11
By David W. Chen
March 22, 2003

They watched it from the streets. They watched it from their offices. And to many New Yorkers, the scenes of a city under siege were achingly familiar.

New Yorkers watching the televised bombing of Baghdad yesterday said they were riveted by the raw and uninterrupted display of American military might. But for some, the bombing brought back particularly visceral and chilling memories. They could not help thinking about Sept. 11, and how New York, too, was once under assault from the skies.

On that day, Eva Temple, 47, was one of the thousands of people working in Lower Manhattan who escaped the rumbling dust cloud that accompanied the collapse of the World Trade Center. And for at least a few days after, she collected prayer cards from the street prophets and doomsday preachers whose advice she would ordinarily have ignored. It made her feel better.

Now, because of the war, Ms. Temple is collecting those cards again. She is opposed to the war, yes, but more than anything, she is frightened, and fears that New York will once again become a target. Yesterday was the worst, she said. There she was, trying to eat in Times Square, when she noticed people craning their necks to watch the giant television screens.
Sign up for the New York Today Newsletter
Each morning, get the latest on New York businesses, arts, sports, dining, style and more.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
''I saw enough, and I don't want to see any more,'' said Ms. Temple, who works for a federal agency in New York City. ''I just feel that retaliation is going to come.''

The terror attack in New York loomed in the minds of many supporters of the war, too. One, Raku DePalma, 32, a computer consultant from Jersey City who watched the bombing from his Manhattan office, started a Web site after the attacks to express his patriotic sentiments. Since then, he has been obsessed, he said, with cataloguing the country's antiterror efforts and preparations for war, taping the news incessantly and watching those tapes, over and over again.

Another supporter of the war, Matt Berman, 31, a vice president of a consulting firm, said the bombing made him fear another terror attack on New York. ''I'm walking to the subway right now and I'm having second thoughts,'' he said.

Yesterday, as bombs rained on a city 6,000 miles from New York, politicians and law enforcement officials took steps to prevent terrorism at home, much like the ones they had taken immediately after Sept. 11.

Security officials searching checked baggage at the American Airlines Terminal at La Guardia Airport found a gas mask and white powder in a suitcase belonging to a woman who had recently traveled from Israel, raising concerns that the powder might be a chemical or biological agent, officials said.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Preliminary tests on the powder indicated that it contained anthrax spores, but later tests found that it did not, officials said.

In the interim, officials closed part of the terminal near the ticketing area, but the woman had already boarded a flight for Dallas. When she landed, she was questioned by the F.B.I. and released, officials said.

Gov. George E. Pataki said he had asked the federal government to enforce a no-flight zone over the Indian Point nuclear power plant in Westchester in light of the heightened threat of a terrorist attack. And Gov. James E. McGreevey of New Jersey and Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut have written letters to Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge asking for a ban on flights over nuclear facilities in their states.

Meanwhile, in downtown Manhattan, Christiane Lissner, 34, said it was frightening to see real bombs falling.

Ms. Lissner said she understood the need for war. ''I can kind of relate to Bush's politics because I was here on 9/11,'' she said. ''I thought it wouldn't have come to that end, though. It's very, very sad.''
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions