SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXU.S.
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: JOURNALISTS

THREATS AND RESPONSES: JOURNALISTS; U.S. News Organizations Tell Employees to Leave Baghdad
By Jim Rutenberg
March 19, 2003

Reporters for American news organizations are streaming out of Baghdad. That raises the possibility that relatively few American journalists would remain to cover a battle for the city.

ABC News, NBC News, Newsweek and The New York Times, among major organizations, have told their staff members to leave the city, where the most important fighting is widely expected to occur. Time magazine and the Fox News Channel said they had reversed plans to send correspondents there, even though the reporters had visas.

CNN and CBS News have allowed correspondents, none American, to stay in Baghdad. But executives said yesterday that they were studying whether the benefits of keeping reporters there outweighed the possible dangers to the journalists.

The BBC, Reuters and other services based in Europe have promised to stay despite the risks. So has Peter Arnett, who, as a correspondent with CNN became the face of the gulf war in 1991. He is now reporting from Baghdad for National Geographic Explorer and MSNBC. He is also contributing to NBC News, which owns MSNBC along with Microsoft.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Some decisions to order staff members to leave Baghdad disappointed some reporters, including Dan Harris of ABC News, who are reluctant to walk away from the story. But those reporters have decided to heed orders.

For those news executives who were still considering what to do, some weighty moral and ethical questions confronted them. They do not want to leave coverage of the possible fighting in Baghdad to the few journalists who manage to stay, the executives said. But they also do not want to endanger their reporters.

''This is an anguishing decision,'' said Philip Bennett, assistant managing editor for foreign news at The Washington Post, which has told two of its three journalists to leave and was still deciding about the third.

Marcy McGinnis, a senior vice president of CBS News, said she was consulting regularly with its correspondent, Lara Logan. If Ms. Logan leaves, CNN would be the lone United States television outlet with staff members in the city.

The chief news executive at CNN, Eason Jordan, said he feared a worst-case scenario where only Iraqi journalists were left.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
''What concerns me,'' Mr. Jordan said, ''is if we abandon Baghdad and have to rely on Iraqi journalists, then the reporting would fall short. And that would be a disservice to our viewers.''

Of course, American journalists would accompany American troops on their way to Baghdad, but they would enter the city only as far as commanders would take them.

Ms. McGinnis and others expressed fears that President Saddam Hussein's government would take journalists for American outlets hostage or base them in strategically important buildings with the aim of thwarting attacks. Mr. Arnett said he was confident that the Iraqis needed Western reporters too much to harm them.

''I really believe they mean what they say that they won't take us hostage and will protect us as well as they can,'' he said.

A spokesman for the Pentagon, Bryan Whitman, said, ''We don't believe that Baghdad is a safe place now or in the immediate future.''

Passage out of Baghdad began to clog yesterday, not only with evacuees, but also reportedly bandits. Iraqi officials moved slowly in granting some exit visas. It took five of NBC's six crew members 43 hours to leave because they were detained and fined for carrying undeclared cash and equipment.

A reporter and photographer for The New York Times also experienced difficulties in leaving, said Catherine Mathis, a spokeswoman for the newspaper. Like other newspapers without correspondents in Baghdad, The Times would rely on reports from news services, Ms. Mathis said. News organizations with reporters in northern Iraq, including The Times, planned to send them back to the city as soon as the situation seemed safe.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions