SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQ; Hussein Says Inspections Will Expose 'American Lies'
By Neil MacFarquhar
Dec. 25, 2002

See the article in its original context from December 25, 2002, Section A, Page 16Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
President Saddam Hussein used the occasion of his holiday greetings to Iraq's Christian minority to denounce the United States, saying weapons inspections would demonstrate the fact that Washington merely sought a pretext to seize Iraqi resources.

''We are confident that the outcome of the inspection operations will be a big shock to the United States and will expose all American lies,'' Mr. Hussein said in a four-page statement.

More than 100 United Nations inspectors are working through Christmas, with 10 inspections of various sites today, including the first publicly acknowledged interview of an Iraqi scientist who had been involved in the nuclear program.

''I told them everything we know clearly and in detail,'' said Sabah Abdel-Nour, a British-trained specialist in materials technology who now works as a professor at Baghdad's University of Technology.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
The professor said he had not been asked whether he wanted to leave the country and had no need to do so. ''I don't have anything to say outside the country more than what I said here,'' he said, adding that he had helped write Iraq's report to the United Nations Security Council about its nuclear program.

He also said he had refused to be interviewed alone, without the presence of one of the Iraqi liaison officers who accompanied the inspectors on a tour of the university's laboratories as well as its departments of applied science and chemical engineering.

''They know exactly what we have been doing in the past,'' he said, describing what he said had been a friendly, professional discussion also focusing on possible links between the university and other sites. ''They have it in detail. The questions were mostly about what has been done or any progress that has been achieved in Iraq after 1998 until now.''

Security Council Resolution 1441, which mandated the inspections, gives the United Nations the authority to fly scientists out of the country, suggesting that inside the country they might be intimidated into silence by the Iraqi government.

The provision has proved controversial, with the United Nations saying it does not want to induce what amounts to defections while some officials in Washington have pushed for the out-of-country interviews as part of a more aggressive approach to the inspections.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Opinion in Iraq's professional community seems divided, with some saying any scientists with such advanced training would most likely have left a long time ago, as some have. Others say the offer of asylum with a guaranteed green card might prove enticing, given the possibility of war.

But many questions hang over the logistics of the interviews. How many relatives, for instance, would a scientist want to take along for their safety, considering that the scientist would probably be considered a traitor for leaving the country.

Iraqi officials say they see no need for interviews abroad, but Maj. Gen. Muhammad Hussam Amin, the chief liaison with the inspectors, told The Associated Press today that anyone who chose to leave could do so without fear of punishment.

President Hussein, in his holiday greeting, said that Iraq had been cooperating fully with the United Nations resolution but that Washington was looking for ''flimsy pretexts and fabrications'' to prove that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction.

He said he hoped the teams could ''rid themselves of the pressures put on them by the United States, Britain and Zionism.''

The holiday message started and ended with references to the peaceful teachings of Jesus, whom the Muslims accept as a prophet but not as the Son of God. About one million of Iraq's estimated population of 24 million people are Christians.

The bulk of the speech was a long diatribe against American designs on Iraq, with Mr. Hussein saying that the new year was starting under ''special circumstances.''
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions