SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INSPECTIONS; U.N. and U.S. Say Key Data Are Still Missing From Iraqis
By Julia Preston
Jan. 25, 2003

Iraq has failed to provide United Nations weapons inspectors with new information they had requested to fill in missing pieces of a crucial weapons declaration, United Nations and American officials said today.

Hans Blix, the head of the chemical and biological weapons team, will describe Iraq's failure to complete the arms declaration when he goes before the Security Council on Monday to present a broad report on the inspections, the officials said.

Mr. Blix has in recent days expressed frustration with Iraq's inaction during two days of meetings in Baghdad earlier this week. He said the Iraqi authorities were not forthcoming with the evidence the inspectors need in order to work from the arms declaration, the officials said.

He told Iraq before his trip that he was seeking at least 11 documents to clarify the declaration, a United Nations official said.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
But Iraqi officials provided only one new document that cast additional light on the status of its past secret programs to build prohibited weapons.

''They gave him virtually nothing, in fact,'' said a United Nations official familiar with the inspections. Mr. Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief nuclear inspector, left Iraq on Monday.

Despite fiery disputes this week between the United States and other Council powers over the inspections, there is wide agreement that Iraq's faulty arms declaration is a serious lapse under Resolution 1441, the measure that set up the inspections.

It requires Iraq to provide a ''currently accurate, full, and complete declaration of all aspects'' of any illegal weapons programs and warns that ''any false statements or omissions'' in the declaration are an element of a grave breach of the resolution.

Mr. Blix had tried to convince Iraqi officials that they should seize on his trip to Baghdad to fill in what he had described as huge gaps in the declaration, which Iraq presented on Dec. 8. Mr. Blix told the Council that the document, even though it was 12,000 pages long, was ''practically devoid of new evidence.''
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Mr. Blix discussed Iraq's failure to clarify the declaration in a closed meeting on Thursday with the board of 16 commissioners who guide the work of his team.

''If you are going to qualify their cooperation on the declaration,'' said one person who took part in the meeting, ''they get a low mark.''

During the Thursday meeting, Mr. Blix appealed publicly to Iraq to emulate the example of South Africa, which voluntarily disclosed and destroyed its nuclear weapons program in the early 1990's.

Mr. Blix also told the commissioners that among some 3,000 documents the inspectors discovered in the home of an Iraqi nuclear scientist last week, a number were marked ''secret'' and ''classified,'' according to another person who was present.

The arms chief also reported that Iraq had demanded to have its own helicopters following the inspectors' United Nations helicopter into no-flight zones patrolled by American and British warplanes in northern and southern Iraq, participants in the meeting said. But Mr. Blix said that issue had been resolved.

In the meeting, Mr. Blix did cite an example of Iraqi cooperation, saying officials had been helpful in setting up for the inspections and allowing the inspectors immediate access to sites they chose to visit.

He indicated that he believes the inspections are producing solid results in spite of the limitations, and he will make a case before the Council on Monday for more time for the inspectors to work.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Dr. ElBaradei will also press the Council for more time, a United Nations official said.

American officials familiar with Mr. Blix's briefing on Thursday argued that it showed that Iraq was not going to cooperate with the inspections as required by Resolution 1441.

''It's just more of Iraq's cheat and retreat,'' an official said.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Site Index
Go to Home Page »
NEWS
Home Page
World
U.S.
Politics
Election 2020
New York
Business
Tech
Science
Sports
Obituaries
Today's Paper
Corrections
OPINION
Today's Opinion
Op-Ed Columnists
Editorials
Op-Ed Contributors
Letters
Sunday Review
Video: Opinion
ARTS
Today's Arts
Art & Design
Books
Dance
Movies
Music
Pop Culture
Television
Theater
Video: Arts
LIVING
Automobiles
Crossword
Education
Food
Health
Jobs
Magazine
Parenting
Real Estate
Style
T Magazine
Travel
Love
MORE
Reader Center
Wirecutter
Live Events
The Learning Network
Tools & Services
N.Y.C. Events Guide
Multimedia
Photography
Video
Newsletters
NYT Store
Times Journeys
Manage My Account
SUBSCRIBE
Home Delivery
Gift Subscriptions
Crossword
Cooking
Email Newsletters
Corporate Subscriptions
Education Rate
Mobile Applications
Replica Edition
Español
中文网
Site Information Navigation
© 2019 The New York Times Company
Contact UsWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions