

Bush Hears Options Including Baghdad Strike
By Thom Shanker
Aug. 7, 2002

President Bush and his national security team were briefed Monday on options for military action against Iraq that included first striking Baghdad and key command posts in hopes of forcing a quick disintegration of the government, administration and Pentagon officials said today.

The approach, nicknamed the ''inside out'' or ''Baghdad first'' option, is intended to kill or isolate President Saddam Hussein and prevent Iraq's use of weapons of mass destruction. It is favored by some senior civilian officials who believe that Mr. Hussein can be toppled with fewer troops than the 250,000 suggested in earlier planning documents.

Military officers caution that even if this plan, estimated to require 80,000 to 100,000 troops, is approved, the full quarter-million force may have to be deployed anyway in case the initial strike goes awry.

A White House spokesman said that no war plan had been approved and that a range of possible actions against Iraq were still under discussion.

''The president has made his views very clear when it comes to Iraq,'' the spokesman, Scott McClellan, told reporters accompanying Mr. Bush aboard Air Force One to Waco, Tex.

''He recently said that he had reached no decision and was keeping all options open,'' Mr. McClellan said. ''That's where things stand.''

Administration, Pentagon and military officials declined to discuss details of the Monday afternoon National Security Council meeting, which included a briefing by Gen. Tommy R. Franks, head of the Central Command.

''Several approaches for dealing with Iraq were discussed,'' said one senior Defense Department official. ''It was not just the military option.''

Another senior official said that the ''concept of operations'' for a military strike against Iraq was coalescing around an initial invasion force of fewer than 100,000 troops, but that the discussions were still broad enough to encompass three or four separate options.

''No decision has been made,'' another senior Pentagon official said today. ''And there is still no timeline for a decision.''

After the Monday meeting, senior Defense Department and military officials said the briefing had not been intended to present a specific war plan for approval or rejection. Instead, those officials said, the purpose was to have General Franks update the President and national security team about ''recent refinements'' to the ''broad outlines of plans'' for possible military action.

Mr. Bush has received similar briefings from General Franks at least twice before, White House officials said, most recently on June 19, when a military operation of about 250,000 troops was discussed.

A range of senior officials said the president's national security team had rejected suggestions that covert action could bring an end to Mr. Hussein's rule and likewise say it is unlikely that he can be toppled with air power alone or in conjunction with small numbers of Special Operations forces and C.I.A. officers coordinating attacks of proxy fighters on the ground.

The planning concept that advocated a major invasion of up to 250,000 troops has been criticized by senior officials who are said to view the plan as unimaginative and unduly cautious.

Therefore, discussion in recent days has evolved toward the ''Baghdad first'' option of striking deep within Iraq and then radiating outward -- essentially the reverse of the invasion that dislodged Mr. Hussein's army of occupation from Kuwait -- administration and Pentagon officials said.

The targets would include Mr. Hussein himself and his command and control system, to paralyze the government and military. Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and their launchers would also be initial targets.

Another goal of a ''Baghdad first'' option would be to so damage the Republican Guard in the early hours of combat that troops in Mr. Hussein's regular army might lay down their arms, advocates of the plan say.
