
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; U.N. Official Says Iraqis Still Build Barred Missile
By Neil MacFarquhar
Feb. 26, 2003

Iraq continues to build its Al Samoud 2 missiles even while facing a United Nations order demanding the start of their destruction by the end of the week, a United Nations spokesman said today.

''Probably they have not received an order to stop, we don't know,'' said Yasuhiro Ueki, the United Nations spokesman here. He said that the weapons inspectors had traced all known missiles and their components, but that Iraq's continued production obscured the total number of existing missiles.

Iraq has also delivered six letters to the weapons inspectors offering further details or discussion about outstanding questions, but it remains uncertain whether such efforts represent the degree of cooperation the United Nations is demanding.

In his Feb. 14 report to the United Nations, Hans Blix, one of two chief weapons inspectors, criticized Baghdad for its lack of cooperation on matters of substance. The Iraqi letters and other proposals seemed to represent an effort to leaven that criticism before Mr. Blix's next report, due at the end of this week, and to bolster those nations campaigning to give the inspectors more months to work.

''The degree of cooperation has to be made in totality, not just one act here and one there,'' Mr. Ueki said.

Mr. Ueki said that ultimately whether Iraq is cooperating to a satisfactory degree is a judgment to be made by Mr. Blix. At the United Nations, Mr. Blix called it a ''positive sign'' that Iraq had dispatched the letters.

He said the Iraqis said they had found new documents relating to the destruction of some weapons of mass destruction in 1991 and a bomb in an area where Baghdad had previously said it had buried shells bearing biological agents.

Several Iraqi officials have said the United Nations order to destroy their Samoud 2 rockets is under consideration, although they dispute the technical argument that the missile exceeds the 92-mile range limit for domestic defensive missiles imposed by they Security Council at the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Given Baghdad's eagerness to avoid lending the White House any pretext to win passage of a second Security Council resolution authorizing military action, however, Iraq is expected to comply with Mr. Blix's demand that it start destroying the missiles and all component parts, plans and fuel by Saturday.

As a foreign diplomat and an Iraqi political analyst pointed out, Al Samoud 2 rockets, believed to number 100 to 120, have only limited value in any battle against United States forces. The Iraqi military is not expected to challenge any invasion in open battlefields. Instead it wants to draw the Americans into fighting for Baghdad street by street, where such missiles would be of little use.

The United Nations said Iraq had taken a number of steps to answer outstanding questions about its chemical and biological programs, which Baghdad says it eliminated along with the programs to produce them in 1991.

The weapons inspectors were invited to investigate excavations the Iraqis started conducting Feb. 19 at Al Aziziya Range, 60 miles southwest of Baghdad, to prove that bombs filled with biological agents were neutralized and dumped there in the summer of 1991.

A United Nations team today looked at munitions fragments and the excavations around the pit. Iraqis contend that improvements in soil testing and other technology since that time ought to be able to prove the quantity of material dumped.

But United Nations inspectors are not convinced that the Iraqi contentions can be proved after so much time has elapsed.

''At this point it is not clear whether this methodology is viable,'' Mr. Ueki said. ''It's not really easy to come up with the quantities involved.''
