

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WEAPONS SLEUTHS; Inspectors Begin Destroying 10 Iraqi Mustard Gas Shells
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 13, 2003

United Nations arms inspectors began work today to destroy 10 old artillery shells filled with mustard gas, as a peace envoy sent here by Pope John Paul II announced that he would soon meet with President Saddam Hussein.

The envoy, Cardinal Roger Etchegaray, a Frenchman who has often carried out negotiations for Pope John Paul II, said an exact date for the meeting was not clear. Cardinal Etchegaray, who arrived on Tuesday and celebrated Mass today at a crowded cathedral here, said he had a personal message from the pope to Mr. Hussein.

In a meeting with the cardinal today, Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan, who is considered one of the three most powerful men in Iraq, said the United States knew that Iraq had no more weapons of mass destruction and wanted only to occupy the nation for its huge oil supplies.

''America is working on dragging the world toward a great catastrophe by insisting on launching an unjust aggression on Iraq,'' Mr. Ramadan said, according to the official Iraqi News Agency.

Cardinal Etchegaray's visit is the first of what is likely to be a long line of high-level diplomatic trips here in the coming days and weeks, aimed at heading off a possible American attack on Iraq.

Today was the first day since the inspectors returned to Iraq in November that they had moved to destroy any prohibited weapons. The shells with mustard gas were placed on United Nations lists of prohibited weapons in the 1990's but not destroyed by the time the inspectors' mission collapsed in 1998.

The shells were found at the Muthanna State Establishment, about 40 miles south of Baghdad. It was the largest producer of chemical weapons here in the 1980's and was one of the first places searched when inspectors returned. Officials said it would take four or five days to destroy the 155-millimeter shells.

Since November, inspectors and Iraqi officials have found 18 empty chemical weapons warheads, but no other banned weapons.

In a country that has shown little public preparation for war, small bunkers reinforced with sandbags, as well as several cement-block pillboxes, have begun appearing off roadways here. In the last week or so, at least 100 such bunkers have been built on the road leading from Baghdad toward Al Musayyib, a town about 50 miles to the south where several military installations are situated.

Meantime today, Iraq offered up another concession as Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the two chief United Nations weapons inspectors, prepared to deliver on Friday another report to the Security Council on the nation's cooperation with inspectors so far.

The government announced that the National Assembly would meet on Friday in special session to pass legislation banning weapons of mass destruction -- one of three central demands of the inspectors in recent weeks.

Iraq has already agreed to two other demands that largely concern the day-to-day operations of inspectors. Earlier this week, the nation's ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammed Aldouri, said Iraq would allow U-2 surveillance planes to assist inspectors in their work, although with some conditions that seemed to violate the Security Council's guidelines for the inspections. Last week, several Iraqi scientists agreed to be interviewed in private by inspectors about Iraq's programs to develop biological, chemical and nuclear weapons.

But the inspectors have continued to complain about the level of Iraqi cooperation on broader questions of disarmament, specifically in providing harder evidence that it destroyed stores of anthrax and the VX nerve agent made before the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Bush administration officials have dismissed the concessions as a ploy to delay a possible attack and to avoid actually disarming.
