

A NATION AT WAR: WITH THE TROOPS -- THIRD INFANTRY DIVISION; For G.I.'s, a Dusty Drive Across the Desert to the Euphrates and the First Iraqi Defense
By Steven Lee Myers
March 22, 2003

After racing unopposed across a wide swath of Iraqi desert, American armored and infantry forces advanced to the Euphrates River today, and overwhelmed resistance from Iraqi forces.

In the Army's first significant clashes, the Third Brigade of the Third Infantry Division came under artillery fire late Friday afternoon from Iraq's 11th Infantry Division, which was arrayed around Nasiriya.

In response, American commanders called in airstrikes from American F-15E Strike Eagles, A-10 Thunderbolts, F/A-18 Hornets and British Harriers and Tornadoes.

Backed by those fighter jets and Apache helicopters, the Third Brigade destroyed Iraqi tanks, seized Iraqi positions and captured hundreds of Iraqi soldiers, who surrendered en masse.

Capt. Chesser E. John, an Air Force liaison attached to the Third Division, said an A-10 had dropped 500-pound bombs on Iraqi artillery.

The contact with Iraqi forces occurred less than 24 hours after the Third Division punched into Iraq from Kuwait, but only after the division and other United States forces had occupied hundreds of square miles around the Shamiya desert.

They went nearly as deep into Iraq in one day as a larger ground force did in four days during the 1991 Persian Gulf war.

''We're ahead of schedule,'' said Col. William F. Grimsley, commander of the division's First Brigade.

Before the encounter with Iraqi troops early today, most of the troops in the division experienced the war as a long, dusty drive across a flat, featureless desert in their M1A1 Abrams tanks, M2 Bradley fighting vehicles and an array of armored trucks and earthmovers.

Unlike British and Marine forces to the east, the Third Division, the main armored force now engaged in the war, has moved through isolated terrain and avoided any cities and towns. They had met only scattered groups of civilians, including shepherds tending camels and sheep and a tractor-trailer and a truck that dashed in front of the advancing columns.

As the division moved forward on Friday, there were few signs of capitulation, since there were few Iraqi troops in the southern desert to surrender.

The First Brigade collected a handful of prisoners and turned them over to military police units bringing up the rear. The brigade's Third Battalion, 69th Armored, seized the Army's first major objective, the airfield at Jalibah, without a fight shortly after noon on Friday.

''Everything has gone excellently,'' the battalion commander, Lt. Col. Ernest P. Marcone, said from atop an M1A1 tank.

The airfield at Jalibah was a target of attack during the gulf war in 1991, and the evidence of that fight remained in the rusted wreckage of aircraft and concrete bunkers, which are now scattered into huge piles of concrete blocks.

Only one bunker appeared relatively unscathed.

The airfield, still pocked by bomb craters, was littered with mines, grenades and unexploded munitions -- ''like the one right behind my vehicle,'' said Maj. Morris T. Goins, the brigade's operations officer, gesturing toward a black bomb shaped like a bowling ball a few yards away.

Army and Marine engineers methodically detonated more than two dozen bombs, punctuating a surreal midday calm with thudding blasts.

Most were left from the first gulf war and remained deadly.

''They're typically even more sensitive,'' said Capt. Daniel H. Hibner of Alpha Company of the 11th Engineers. ''If you disturb them, they're more likely to go off.''

Even as the minesweeping continued, squadrons of Apache and Black Hawk helicopters arrived, hovering in loose, ominous formations.

Within hours, an abandoned, battered airstrip became a bustling forward base for attack helicopters, as well as those designed to evacuate the wounded.

The Army brigade turned the airfield over to a Marine unit advancing from the southeast and moved on.
