

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ROME; Blair Says He Wants to Avoid War and Work With U.N., but That Iraq Must Disarm
By Frank Bruni
Feb. 22, 2003

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain said today that he was eager to avoid war in Iraq and determined to try to work through the United Nations, but that his belief in the need for Iraq to be disarmed -- by force, if necessary -- was firm.

Against the backdrop of fervent opposition in much of Europe and his own country to the prospect of an American-led invasion of Iraq, Mr. Blair used a news conference here to assert, as forcefully as ever, that neither he nor President Bush were driving events toward a military confrontation.

That responsibility, he said, rested with the Iraqi president, Saddam Hussein, whom he faulted for more than a decade of not complying with international demands that he disarm.

''Let me make one thing plain,'' Mr. Blair said. ''We do not want war. No one wants war.''

But, he said at another point, ''I can't avoid it unless Saddam chooses the route of peaceful disarmament. He knows what he has to do, and he has the capability to do it. But does he have the will?''

Mr. Blair's comments came after a meeting here with Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy, who joined him at the news conference, and those remarks reflected his assiduous efforts to explain his pro-American position on Iraq, which has put him in political peril.

He has repeatedly asserted a moral case for a war in Iraq, and on Saturday he is scheduled to have a private meeting with Pope John Paul II, a firm opponent of a military strike.

Both Mr. Blair and Mr. Berlusconi lead countries less supportive of a potential war than they are, and both were reminded of that last Saturday by large antiwar protests in London and Rome.

As the two men spoke with reporters today, they seemed acutely sensitive to that opposition and confronted it head-on. They said that people were forgetting how much time Mr. Hussein had already had to prove his good will.

Mr. Berlusconi complained that antiwar protesters had been so intent on characterizing President Bush as Hitler and him as Mussolini that Mr. Hussein was almost depicted as a good citizen.

Mr. Berlusconi has generally supported the United States, but recently said that a new United Nations Security Council resolution should precede any military strike. Mr. Blair has already sent troops into the region.

He said today that he respected the reservations of many people in Britain, but implored them to respect his judgment as well.

''I don't pretend to have a monopoly of wisdom on this or any other issue,'' he said. ''All I ask people to do is understand that however sincerely they hold their view, I hold my view sincerely, too.''

That view, he said, was that the United Nations could not threaten Iraq with harsh consequences for failing to disarm and then retreat, that Iraqis had suffered greatly under Mr. Hussein, and that there was a growing body of evidence that connected Iraq and Al Qaeda.

''If you leave Saddam Hussein with his chemical, biological and potentially nuclear weapons, the link between that and international terrorism is so obvious it hardly needs to be stated,'' Mr. Blair said.

He also said that Mr. Hussein would disarm peacefully only if the threat of consequences was real and the message about that was united, seemingly chiding countries reluctant to support a military option.

''Even now we can avoid conflict, but we cannot avoid it by weakness and we cannot avoid it by going back on what we've already said,'' Mr. Blair said.

Mr. Berlusconi said, ''If you want peace, you must prepare for war.''
