

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE OPPOSITION; Kurds Ask U.S. Not to Allow Turkish Military Inside Iraq
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 26, 2003

In a vote that exposed frustration over elements of the United States war plans, the Kurdish parliament in northern Iraq asked Washington today to prevent Turkish military forces from entering Iraq in the event of a war to oust Saddam Hussein.

The Parliament's unanimous vote, for a resolution demanding noninterference in Iraq from regional countries, formalized misgivings in the Kurdish zone about the Bush administration's negotiations with Turkey to allow American troops to open a northern front against Iraq's army.

It was carefully timed, coming hours before Zalmay Khalilzad, President Bush's special envoy, arrived in northern Iraq to meet with opposition leaders.

Tensions between Turks and Kurds, already high, have escalated since Yasar Yakis, Turkey's foreign minister, suggested recently that while on missions in Iraq, Turkish troops might attempt to disarm Iraq's Kurds.

It was regarded here as nearly the perfect insult to Kurdish sensibilities. Iraq's Kurds are proud of their armed resistance to Mr. Hussein and distrustful of the Turkish military, which has fought a long war against Turkey's own Kurdish minority.

Minutes after the vote today, members of Parliament said they would fight a Turkish military incursion themselves. ''I carried weapons for 12 years against the Iraqi regime,'' said Rizgar Haji Kayil, a former guerrilla who is now a legislator. ''If the Turks enter Kurdistan, I will carry weapons all of my life.''

Mr. Kayil warned that Mr. Bush risked alienating a staunch ally. ''If Turkey enters into Kurdistan, the United States will lose its best friend, which is the Kurds,'' he said.

A State Department official said Kurdish concerns, while genuine, were premature, because the United States and Turkey had not yet completed plans.

''These are not things the United States has signed on to,'' the official said. ''The Kurds do not have to feel that there is some sort of separate peace between the United States and Turkey.''

Events today were indications of a turnabout in Kurdish attitudes. For months Kurds have enthusiastically supported American plans to remove Mr. Hussein. The principal Kurdish parties, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan and the Kurdistan Democratic Party, have acted as hosts to American intelligence teams since last fall and toned down nationalist oratory to comply with the administration's will.

Kurds still largely support military action. But in recent weeks, as the United States has signaled a willingness to allow Turkish forces into Iraq, many Kurds have soured on America's notion of how to conduct the war, and said Washington has been too compliant in acquiescing to Turkish demands.

Kurds worry that the Turks will use a presence in Iraq as a pretext for campaigns against them. The Kurdish government, which has administered northern Iraq since it broke free of Mr. Hussein in 1991, fears that Turkey wants to squelch Kurdish advances before the example spreads to Turkish Kurds.

The vote today also gave voice to frustrations that Kurdish parties had tried to solve by more quiet means. In a joint letter to Mr. Bush on Feb. 13, Massoud Barzani, leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, and Jalal Talabani, leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, wrote that Kurds fear ''Turkey's real agenda is to crush our experiment in democratic self-government.''

The leaders, both former guerrillas, warned: ''Should Turkish military forces come in contact with Kurdish populations, there is a real risk of clashes.''

They asked the United States to sign a memorandum of understanding, specifying, among other things, American support for nonintervention. A Kurdish official involved in negotiations with the United States said Mr. Bush had not replied, a sign some here take as an untimely snub.
