

U.S. Warns of Arms Threat, Citing North Korea and Iraq
By Elizabeth Olson
Jan. 26, 2002

A top American arms negotiator singled out Iraq and North Korea this week as threats when he urged a United Nations group to strengthen accords against weapons of mass destruction.

With the events of Sept. 11 fresh in mind, John R. Bolton, the under secretary of state for arms control, urged the forum to overcome its long-standing divisions and step up efforts to ban production of nuclear materials that could be used for bomb making.

''The fact that governments which sponsor terrorist groups are also pursuing chemical, biological, nuclear and missile programs is alarming and cannot be ignored,'' he told the 66 participating nations at the year's opening session of the forum, the only multilateral arms negotiating body.

''Those who think they can pursue nuclear weapons without detection -- the United States and its allies will prove you wrong,'' he declared.

The nuclear weapons inspection system under the International Atomic Energy Agency must be enforced, he said, to help detect clandestine efforts to build weapons. He also insisted that countries be accountable for treaty violations, including those of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.

''Countries such as North Korea and Iraq must cease their violations of the N.P.T. and allow the I.A.E.A. to do its work,'' Mr. Bolton said.

In response, the delegates of Iraq and North Korea denied that they had violated the arms accords.

North Korea's delegate, Ri Thae Gun, said his country was allowing international inspection of its nuclear facilities.

But a senior American official said there were suspicions that North Korea, which is not currently engaged in any discussions with the Bush administration on its weapons programs, was secretly augmenting its abilities.

The citing of Iraq signaled the Bush administration's rising impatience with the absence of United Nations weapons inspectors in that country.

''We are coming to a critical point with Iraq,'' a senior American official said. If weapons inspectors are not allowed to return, ''there are going to be consequences,'' he warned. He declined to spell out what they might be.

Weapons inspections were supposed to be part of the arrangement negotiated for Iraq after its defeat in the 1991 gulf war by an American-led coalition, but the inspectors were withdrawn in 1998 in the face of Iraqi recalcitrance.

Iraq's delegate to the talks, Samir al-Nima, said that the accusations by Washington were false and that it demonstrated its double standard by not naming Israel, which is widely suspected of having nuclear weapons, though it neither confirms nor denies it.

Though the terror attacks of Sept. 11 gave new urgency to the discussions here, differences among the nations taking have stalled progress for several years.

The United States, for instance, opposes talks to bar weapons in outer space, but supports negotiations on nuclear materials that can be used to make weapons.

Moreover, this week the Russian delegate, Leonid Skotnikov, criticized the Bush administration for pulling out of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and sinking an effort to set up a verification scheme for biological weapons.

Mr. Bolton did not respond directly to the remarks, but insisted later that the United States remained committed to its arms control agreements.

One pact that Washington wants enforced more strongly is the Chemical Weapons Convention where, Mr. Bolton said, the administration is prepared to use unscheduled on-site inspections to crack down on violators. ''The U.S. is alarmed by the continuing spread of dangerous technology to countries pursuing illegal programs,'' he said.

He said the spread of missile technology was also alarming the Bush administration, which had compiled a list of suspect activities by companies from ''at least a dozen nations.''
