

STATE OF THE UNION: BAGHDAD; Iraqi Aide Pledges 'Extra Effort' to Cooperate With Inspectors
By Ian Fisher
Jan. 29, 2003

A top adviser to Saddam Hussein pledged tonight to make the ''extra effort'' to cooperate with United Nations weapons inspectors, but offered no dramatic initiative for doing so a day after the inspection team delivered a largely negative report on Iraq's cooperation so far.

''We have for sure provided complete cooperation in every aspect,'' the adviser, Lt. Gen. Amir Rasheed, a former oil minister, told reporters. ''But as they have said, there is an opportunity for what they call pro-active cooperation. We said, 'O.K., welcome.' Proactive means we are ready as Iraq to facilitate.''

Still, with war appearing ever closer, he gave no specifics of what Iraq might do. He also acknowledged that the report delivered to the United Nations Security Council on Monday was more negative than he had expected. ''We hoped for better than we saw,'' he said.

President Hussein continued meeting with top military commanders, warning them on Monday against treason, which he called ''the height of human weakness,'' official newspapers reported today.

''Treason is an unmanly act,'' he said, in another of many publicized meetings with commanders over the last week. ''I do not have, nor should you have, any concern. However, you should demonstrate vigilance, the legitimate and appropriate vigilance.''

The Bush administration has made plain that it would welcome Mr. Hussein's removal from power in a coup, although there is no sign here of any disloyalty to the man who has ruled Iraq for more than two decades.

Another top adviser, Tariq Aziz, a deputy prime minister, said in several recent television interviews that Iraq was readying to defend itself in case of an attack.

To Britain's Channel 4, Mr. Aziz acknowledged that Iraq had distributed chemical weapons suits to some military units, but added, however, that it would not be the first to use chemical weapons because he said it had none to use. To the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, he said that while Iraq would not attack targets in the United States, it might retaliate against Kuwait if American troops invaded from there.

He warned that Iraq would defend itself strongly. ''I would say that if the Americans try to invade Iraq, they will be fought courageously and effectively, and they will have a great number of casualties,'' Mr. Aziz said in the CBC interview.

General Rasheed's reaction to the reports delivered by the two top United Nations weapons inspectors on Monday was more conciliatory than Iraq's first statements on the report. One of the inspectors, Hans Blix, outlined a long list of what he said were Iraq's failures since inspections resumed in late November.

The general said the negative points were represented disproportionately in Mr. Blix's report, while other ''important issues have been abbreviated and even shrunk and sometimes even fully ignored.''

He repeated several times that Iraq had no weapons of mass destruction or programs to develop them, stressing that various American and British intelligence reports had not helped to uncover any.

Just before he spoke, the United Nations here said two more Iraqi scientists had refused to be interviewed in private -- a key demand of both the United Nations inspectors and the Bush administration for full cooperation. That brings to 16 the total number of scientists who have declined to be interviewed outside the presence of an official government representative.

General Rasheed also sought to rebut several of Mr. Blix's allegations, in particular that Iraq had failed to account for stores of anthrax and the VX nerve agent. The general insisted that the VX was produced in 1990 as ''an experimental production, and it failed.''
