

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUSSEIN'S FOES; Iraqi Opposition to Form Leadership Team to Prepare for a Transition to Democracy
By Judith Miller
Feb. 28, 2003

Defying American wishes, Iraqi opposition leaders decided today to form a leadership committee to help prepare for a transition to democracy if President Saddam Hussein is ousted, and to dispatch a delegation to Ankara to try to dissuade Turkey from sending troops into northern Iraq during a war.

Both steps seem aimed at enhancing the status of the Iraqi National Congress, the umbrella opposition group, whose 55-member advisory committee has been holding its first meeting in Iraq in nearly a decade.

The delegates are seeking to portray the Congress as independent, not, as some critics charge, America's pawn. In backing Kurdish demands that Turkish forces not cross into northern Iraq, the opposition leaders want to be perceived as Iraqi patriots determined to safeguard their country's sovereignty.

Zalmay Khalilzad, President Bush's special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, who praised it in a speech to the Congress's opening session on Wednesday, spent much of today trying, unsuccesfully, to persuade delegates not to form a leadership group.

In his speech, he urged the group to create a political task force that would have a largely advisory role. He said that group would be one of several to provide counsel on issues like relief and reconstruction assistance, public diplomacy, outreach to Iraqis living under Mr. Hussein and securing the country during a war.

But Ahmad Chalabi, a leader of the Congress, and the two main Kurdish leaders -- Hoshyar Zebari, head of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, and Jalal Talabani, head of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan -- and even Abdelaziz al-Hakim, a leader of the Iranian-backed Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq -- favored formation of a group that is, in Mr. Zebari's word, the nucleus of a future representative government of Iraq. In an interview today, Mr. Talabani supported creation of a leadership group. He said the Kurds wanted equality in a federated Iraq in which they would voluntarily give up some rights that Kurds in northern Iraq now enjoy, like collecting customs and maintaining their own armed forces.

The group also put its own spin on Mr. Khalilzad's recommendation that the Kurds work with the United States and Turkey to support the liberation of Iraq. Mr. Zebari announced today that the opposition had decided to send a delegation to Turkey to show that all Iraqis, not just the Kurds, were against ''any regional intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.''

He reiterated his warning that there would be clashes if Turks entered northern Iraq in large numbers. Iraqi Kurds, who have controlled northern Iraq since Mr. Hussein's defeat in the Persian Gulf war of 1991, deeply mistrust Turkey, which has historic claims to some Iraqi territory and a desire to control Kurdish separatist forces there.

Mr. Zebari said he hoped the agreement that the United States was trying to sign with Turkey, which Turkey has insisted on before it allows American combat forces to use Turkish bases for an offensive against Mr. Hussein, ''won't be at the expense of the poor Kurdish people.''

The tone of challenge to Washington was atypical of that struck here by the Iraqi opposition, which is under enormous political pressure in this prelude to a possible war.

On one hand the dissidents are trying to assure Iraqis living under Mr. Hussein that they can protect their country's interests and its independence. On the other hand, they know that Mr. Hussein cannot be deposed without American military power, and they are eager to avoid alienating the Americans, who would control Iraq for a time after a successful military invasion.
