

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SUSPECTS; 2 Germans Go on Trial In Arms Sales To Baghdad
By Mark Landler
Jan. 15, 2003

In a case likely to revive uncomfortable questions about Germany's past role in supplying Saddam Hussein's war machine, two German businessmen went on trial here today on charges of illegally selling Iraq components to build a long-range cannon.

The men, Bernd Schompeter and Willi Heinz Ribbeck, are accused of breaking German laws that regulate exports to Iraq and the United Nations sanctions imposed on Baghdad after the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The German prosecutor, Stephan Morweiser, said the defendants sold industrial drills to a front company in Jordan. From there, they were shipped to Iraq for the purpose of building cannons mounted on tanks.

''You can use this cannon to shoot nuclear, chemical or biological ammunition,'' Mr. Morweiser said. If found guilty, the men face up to 15 years in prison.

Mr. Schompeter, a 59-year-old engineer who ran a trading company in the Middle East, testified that he knew the drills were going to Iraq. But he said he did not know the Iraqis planned to use them to make weapons, as the prosecution stated. The delivery, made in 1999, was worth roughly $210,000.

Iraq has denied it bought equipment from German firms for large-caliber guns. But the path between Germany and Iraq is well trod, dating back to the 1980's, when German companies were among the most trusted suppliers of components and technology that turned out -- after the 1991 war -- to have been used in Iraqi weapons programs.

The breadth of the commercial ties was underscored last month in Iraq's weapons declaration, which included a list of foreign suppliers. German firms accounted for 80 of the 150 companies.

A vast majority of those deals were made before 1992, when the German government tightened restrictions on exports of technology with military uses. But some experts contend Germany is still struggling to stanch the flow of equipment that has both civilian and military uses.

''They're having enforcement problems,'' said Kelly Motz, a researcher at the Wisconsin Project for Nuclear Arms Control, a Washington-based organization. ''It's hard to completely eradicate procurement networks.''

The prosecutor laid out a tangled web of transactions, involving German and Jordanian companies and an Iraqi-American middleman, through which these defendants sought to evade export laws.

The drills were made by Burgsmüller, a northern German machine tool company where Mr. Ribbeck, 53, worked as a marketing manager. He oversaw their sale to a German trading firm, Alriwo, based in Mannheim. From there, the drills were sent to Jordan, before being shipped to their final destination in Iraq.

Mr. Schompeter, who brokered the deal, said he only became suspicious about the purpose of the 39-foot-long drills when he saw them arrive, in very long boxes, at a warehouse. ''I never really knew,'' he said. ''I only guessed.''

The prosecutor, Mr. Morweiser, said he was confident he would obtain a conviction, based on Mr. Schompeter's admission that he knew the shipment was bound for Iraq. But he acknowledged that other suspects in the deal, potentially more central, had yet to be brought to trial.

An American citizen of Iraqi background, Sahib Abd al-Amir al-Haddad, acted as a middleman between the Germans and Iraqis, handing over the list of items Baghdad wanted. Germany is seeking his extradition from Bulgaria, where he was arrested on Nov. 25 after arriving from Turkey.

Mr. Morweiser said Germany was under pressure to appear vigilant in curbing sales to Iraq, in light of its checkered history. The trial is also drawing intense attention from news outlets here, as the German chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, continues to oppose an American-led war.
