

Republicans Wielding Iraq as an Issue in Senate Races in Conservative States
By Alison Mitchell
Sept. 18, 2002

Republicans have gone on the offensive on Iraq and related national security topics in a handful of tight Senate races in recent days, in a sign of how they hope to use the issue against vulnerable Democrats in conservative states.

In 1991, 47 Senate Democrats voted against authorizing the first President Bush to attack Saddam Hussein for invading Kuwait. Republicans have been examining that vote to see where it can be of the most political use as Mr. Bush's son takes on Mr. Hussein and the midterm elections approach.

A prime case involves Senator Tim Johnson, Democrat of South Dakota, who is in a tight re-election battle against Representative John Thune in a state that voted overwhelmingly for George W. Bush in 2000.

The contest is one of the most closely watched in the nation, pitting Mr. Johnson, the protégé of the Senate's majority leader, Tom Daschle, against Mr. Thune, whom President Bush personally wooed into the race.

After a campaign year that has focused largely on local issues like drought and the farm bill, Mr. Thune, in a speech to Rotary members on Monday, called for a swift Congressional vote to support the president on Iraq without waiting for the United Nations.

Mr. Thune's campaign has also been staging rallies of veterans who have questioned Mr. Johnson's vote against the Persian Gulf war in 1991 and noted that he was among a group of lawmakers who sued the first President Bush in an effort to require him to seek Congressional approval before going to war.

Mr. Johnson shot back today with a letter to President Bush that said he believed that ''it is in our national security interests to pursue regime change in Iraq'' and that he was dismayed by recent news stories quoting political operatives on whether gains could be made on the issue. His campaign has sent out its own military veterans to call on Mr. Thune not to exploit Iraq for political gain.

South Dakota is also one of two states where the National Republican Senatorial Committee went on the air last weekend to highlight campaign contributions the Democrat received from the Council for a Livable World, a group that promotes arms control and weapons nonproliferation.

The other state was South Carolina, where the Democratic Senate candidate is Alex Sanders.

The advertisement is similar to one that ran a few weeks ago in Arkansas, where the incumbent Republican, Tim Hutchinson, faces a formidable challenge from Mark Pryor.

It asks, ''Would you stand with one of the most dangerous antimilitary groups in America?''

The council has responded with a list of 38 former government officials, retired members of the military and scientists who support it as a ''responsible and patriotic'' organization founded by scientists who wanted to warn the world of the dangers of nuclear war.

With Democrats complaining that the Iraq debate is being politicized, Ginny Wolfe, a spokeswoman for the Republican campaign committee, called voting records on military issues a critical part of the political debate. She accused Democrats of trying to hide their stances.

''These issues are not just legitimate issues for discussion,'' Ms. Wolfe said, ''they are critical issues for discussion. What can be more important for voters to understand than all of the candidates' positions on military and national defense in a time of war?''

Democrats vowed that such advertisements would not go unanswered.

''Impugning the patriotism of Democrats is Page 1 in the Republican playbook,'' said James M. Jordan, the executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. ''We intend to counterpunch on this.''
