

Bush Backs Retaliation By Israelis If Iraq Attacks
By David E. Sanger
Oct. 17, 2002

President Bush said today that he fully expected that Israel would aggressively retaliate after any unprovoked Iraqi attack.

But in an hourlong meeting with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon today, the two leaders were ''deliberately ambiguous,'' in the words of one senior administration official, about how Israel might respond to any effort by Iraq to start a broader regional war if the United States seeks to overthrow Saddam Hussein.

Mr. Bush's public endorsement of Israel's right to defend itself, and his private effort to urge Mr. Sharon to show restraint if Saddam Hussein tries to draw the country into any conflict, demonstrated the tremendous concern in the White House and in Israel about how a confrontation with Iraq could spill into Mideast politics. While officials would not describe the conversation between the two men in any detail, one administration official noted today ''there is some utility in keeping the nature of Israel's response vague.''

The meeting took place just days after Mr. Bush sent a message to the Israeli leader expressing deep concern over what the administration described as a significant increase in Palestinian civilian deaths during recent Israeli Army operations. The message asserted that Israel had failed to keep promises to ease restrictions on the movements of ordinary Palestinians hemmed in by checkpoints and blockades of cities and villages.

But there was no public discussion of that subject today, as Mr. Sharon heartily praised Mr. Bush. ''We never had such relations with any president of United States as we have with you,'' Mr. Sharon said as he and Mr. Bush met reporters briefly in the Oval Office. ''And we never had such a cooperation in everything as we have with the current administration.''

In return, Mr. Bush gave no indication today of any effort to persuade Mr. Sharon show restraint in the event of an attack by Iraq. ''If Iraq attacks Israel tomorrow, I would assume the prime minister would respond,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He's got a desire to defend himself.''

But Mr. Bush was speaking about an unprovoked attack by Iraq, what many in the administration call the far easier case of retaliation.

Far more difficult is the question of how Israel might respond if attacked in the midst of an American conflict with Iraq.

Many Israeli officials have regretted the country's decision to heed Mr. Bush's father and not respond to the Iraqi Scud attacks in the Persian Gulf war in 1991. They fear that decision eroded the effectiveness of Israel's deterrence policy, and many have urged that Mr. Sharon respond strongly to any attack. The former general has publicly suggested that he probably would respond.

A senior Administration official said today that ''in the event that the U.S. goes to war with Iraq, and Israel is attacked, we would expect consultations that are military to military, and political leaders to political leaders, and the larger interests of our objectives vis-à-vis Iraq would be pre-eminent.''

In short, the official said, Mr. Bush hopes to short-circuit any Iraqi attack on Israel, and hopes Israel will allow the United States to take the military lead on any response to an attack. He noted that Iraq has many fewer Scud missiles than it did in 1991, and that the American capability to detect them is improved.

Mr. Bush said today that he would send Assistant Secretary of State William J. Burns to the Middle East to work on security and peacekeeping. That decision followed an extended period when no American officials have been conspicuously present in the area.
