

THREATS AND RESPONSES: JAKARTA; 2 Top Muslims In Indonesia Rebuke U.S. On Iraq Policy
By Jane Perlez
Jan. 29, 2003

The leaders of Indonesia's two biggest Muslim groups have declined an invitation to go to Washington, saying that they were offended by the Bush administration's policy toward Iraq.

One of the leaders, Hasyim Muzadi, who heads Nahdlatul Ulama, the largest Muslim group in the country, also cited new immigration restrictions on Indonesian males in the United States as a reason for refusing to attend the annual congressional inter-religious prayer breakfast next month.

The announcement by Mr. Muzadi and Ahmad Sjaffii Maarif, head of the second-largest Muslim group in Indonesia, is considered significant because they are often invited by the United States Embassy to meet visiting American officials. They are introduced on such occasions as the embodiment of mainstream Islamic thinking here in the world's most populous Muslim nation.

Last year, Mr. Muzadi, whose organization claims 40 million members, was among a small group of Islamic thinkers invited to meet Secretary of State Colin L. Powell during his visit here. Ten days ago, he met with the Assistant Secretary of State for Asian and Pacific Affairs, James A. Kelly, at the American Embassy.

Mr. Maarif holds two degrees from the United States, including a doctorate in Islamic thought from the University of Chicago.

Explaining his decision not to attend the prayer breakfast, the usually politic Mr. Maarif said on Indonesian television tonight that ''only idiotic people'' would attend such a prayer session, scheduled from Feb. 4 to Feb. 7. The timing meant, he said, ''that people could be praying for world peace at the same time as there was an attack on Iraq.''

Earlier, Mr. Muzadi told reporters that he believed the prayer breakfast, which he attended last year, had little to do with his hopes for promotion of ''peace and justice'' by the United States. ''Following its new immigration policy, which mostly affects Indonesian citizens living there and its plan to attack Iraq, I don't think the event is relevant at all,'' Mr. Muzadi said.

The Indonesian government has taken strong exception to Indonesia being added to the list of countries whose male citizens in the United States must register with the immigration authorities.

Indonesia is the only country in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations among the 25 nations whose citizens must comply with the new registration requirements. Indonesia was added to the list 10 days ago.

Designed by the Bush administration as way of keeping track of potential terrorists, the policy takes effect next month. The Indonesian government has called it discriminatory. Under the new regulations Indonesian males now in the United States have until March 28 to show they have valid visas and working documents for employment or study.

In some ways, the boycott of the prayer breakfast by two of the most progressive Islamic leaders came as little surprise. Their public statements appeared to reflect the growing anti-Americanism in Indonesia as the possibility of a war against Iraq increased.

The military and the police have begun to prepare for violence and unrest if the United States goes to war. The police announced the formation today of a committee to protect foreign interests in Indonesia.

An expert on Indonesian Islam said today that Mr. Muzadi and Mr. Maarif had already been under pressure for being too pro-American. ''These progressive leaders are often criticized for being too pro the United States,'' said Robin Bush, the director of Islam and civil society program at the Asia Foundation here. ''If war breaks out, any association with the United States will be a political liability for them.''
