
A NATION CHALLENGED: THE BRITISH; Blair's Support of Bush on Iraq Is Criticized in His Own Party
By Warren Hoge
March 9, 2002

Prime Minister Tony Blair, America's most vocal ally in the war on terrorism, is running into resistance from his party, the British public and some members of his own cabinet for backing President Bush's call for action against Iraq.

Sixty-two Labor members of Parliament have put forward a motion urging him not to support any American moves against Baghdad, and public surveys show that many people who backed the war in Afghanistan and dismissed criticism of the American treatment of prisoners in Guantánamo Bay do not favor military action in Iraq.

As evidence that plans for British participation are already under way, critics point to Mr. Blair's continuing pro-United States statements, a visit by Vice President Dick Cheney here this Monday and the announcement Thursday of a Blair trip to the United States next month to discuss antiterror strategies with President Bush.

Britain has a military presence in the Persian Gulf, with bombers based in Turkey, Kuwait and Oman and an aircraft carrier in the Indian Ocean.

During what participants described as a robust debate at Thursday's weekly cabinet meeting, ministers expressed concern over the lack of public support for action against Iraq and the absence of any strategy for limiting Britain's involvement.

The pro-Labor Mirror pictured Mr. Blair today on its front page side by side with Mr. Bush in a cowboy hat under the headline ''Howdy Poodle.''

Mr. Blair has publicly backed Mr. Bush's stance on Iraq, saying the president was right to raise the issue of the threat posed to countries around the world by Saddam Hussein and his development of weapons of mass destruction.

''Iraq is plainly in breach of the United Nations Security Council resolution in relation to the accumulation of weapons of mass destruction,'' he told the Commons this week, ''and we have to deal with it.''

Robin Cook, the leader of the House and former foreign secretary, said the negative reactions were misguided and premature.

''There is a danger that discussion in the press is getting way ahead of where discussion is here and in the United States,'' he said. ''There is no decision. There is no immediate prospect of a decision, and it does not necessarily follow that there will ever be a decision on the use of military action.''

One man scheduled to meet Mr. Cheney on Monday predicted today that the vice president would hear some of Mr. Blair's cabinet members' misgivings directly. ''I am sure that he'll get dusted up by some of the ministers,'' he said.

The White House spokesman, Ari Fleischer, described Mr. Blair's meeting with Mr. Bush next month as a discussion on ''the ongoing campaign against terrorism, as well as key foreign policy issues.'' Mr. Blair and his wife, Cherie, will be guests April 5 through 7 at Mr. Bush's ranch in Crawford, Tex.

David Chaytor, one of the Labor legislators who signed the motion against action in Iraq, said that ''certainly there is a serious threat that the Labor Party could split down the middle if the government pushed ahead with its support for the U.S.''

But Donald Anderson, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Select Committee, said it would be foolish to rule out the military option against Saddam Hussein. He emphasized, however, that ''the leadership has to consult the party and show it is not reckless, it is being cautious, looking at the evidence and seeking to ensure that we are serious when we say that the real aim is to get the weapons inspectors back in.''
