

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraq Denies Inspectors' Charges on Missing Equipment
By John F. Burns
Dec. 4, 2002

The Iraqi government moved quickly today to counter suggestions that United Nations weapons inspectors had uncovered a breach by Iraqi officials.

On Monday, inspectors who visited the Karama missile development plant here said they had been unable to find some equipment discovered and tagged by inspectors in 1998.

Officials at the plant said that some items had been destroyed in an American missile attack in December 1998, and that others had ''been transferred to other sites,'' according to a statement by the inspectors. This raised the possibility that the Iraqis had moved the items to other missile plants engaged in banned weapons development.

Iraqi officials said today that they had acknowledged moving the equipment, and specified where it had been moved, in a declaration on Oct. 1 in Vienna.

The Iraqis said the whereabouts of the equipment would also be noted in the declaration that Iraq is required to make by this Sunday of all its banned weapons projects. Maj. Gen. Hussam Mohammed Amin, head of the National Monitoring Directorate, the agency that prepares Iraq's declarations, told reporters today that the report would be completed and delivered on Saturday.

The swift reaction appeared to reflect a desire to avoid doing anything so early in the new round of inspections that might set off American military action. The last round of inspections ended in 1998 with the withdrawal of the teams. The American and British bombings followed closely after their departure.

Within 12 hours of the inspectors' announcement that the missile equipment was missing, the Foreign Ministry posted a lengthy statement on the issue in the Information Ministry and General Amin followed up, saying that foreign news reports had falsely indicted Iraq.

''The Al Karama plant was bombed in 1998 and the equipment was relocated to some other places,'' he said. The plant's managers reported their action to the Iraqi monitoring directorate, he said, because there were no United Nations inspectors in Iraq after December 1998.

Hiro Ueki, a spokesman for the United Nations inspectors in Baghdad, said the documentation submitted on Oct. 1 was being checked.

At the United Nations, Secretary General Kofi Annan said that Iraq's cooperation with the inspections ''seems to be good'' so far, but he said that the inspectors were just starting their work. Mr. Annan emphasized that Baghdad would have to continue to cooperate throughout the inspections. ''This is not a one-week wonder,'' he said. --------------------

Bush Security Aide Meets a Top Inspector

(By The New York Times)

WASHINGTON, Nov. 3 -- Bush administration officials and United Nations staff members said today that Condoleezza Rice, the national security advisor, and Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector for biological and chemical weapons, had a one-on-one meeting on Monday morning, though no one would discuss details.

American officials have for weeks been pressing Mr. Blix to carry out an aggressive inspections program. Mr. Blix's spokesman, Ewen Buchanan, said that current plans call for increasingly aggressive inspections, but that the teams can only carry them out when they have more experts on the ground. At the moment, there are only 17 inspectors in Iraq, but the teams are set to increase to about 100 inspectors by late December. ''Clearly it is our intention to do multiple simultaneous inspections, but we can't do it in the first week,'' he said.

Asked if the Bush Administration was exerting more pressure to step up inspections, Mr. Buchanan said Mr. Blix receives recommendations and advice from many Security Council members and others.
