

A NATION AT WAR: INTELLIGENCE; U.S. Officials Fear Iraqis Plan To Use Gas on G.I.'s
By David E. Sanger
March 25, 2003

Senior administration officials said today that they believe that the Iraqi leadership may be holding its chemical weapons in reserve until American forces approach Baghdad, while other officials said intelligence suggests that Saddam Hussein may have authorized one of his key commanders to use those weapons against Shiite Muslims in the south of the country.

But so far, Iraq has used no chemical weapons, and American forces have found none. Suggestions on Sunday that a chemical plant in Najaf might be a weapons site have turned out to be false.

Nonetheless, Pentagon officials, noting that Iraqi prisoners of war captured in recent days carried gas masks with them, say they believe that the weapons may be intended for use when American forces are in close quarters -- and at that time, they may blame the United States for unleashing them.

Earlier in the day, administration officials said they believe, based on intelligence reports received during the past month, that such an attack could be authorized in the south, though they have no evidence it is imminent. ''There are such reports,'' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said today, shortly after administration officials began telling reporters of the intelligence.

''I have no doubt that he would do such a thing if he thought it served his interest,'' Mr. Powell said today on Fox Television. ''And so we are concerned about it.''

Rumors of the reports have circulated for several weeks, and they may explain why, in the opening hours of the war, American Special Forces and Australian commandos flew into Iraq to seize command and control centers that American officials say are linked to chemical weapons sites.

The quality of the intelligence that Mr. Powell and other officials referred to today is unclear. When pressed, administration officials said that they had no evidence that any such attack was imminent. ''The conclusion is that Chemical Ali may have the authority to launch such an attack -- not that he has an operation planned,'' said one senior administration official, referring to Ali Hassan al-Majid, a top aide to Saddam Hussein, who is believed responsible for a mass killing of Kurds with chemical weapons in Halabja, Iraq, 15 years ago this month.

President Bush gave an extensive description of that attack in his radio address on Saturday. But he made no reference at that time to the authorization orders that Mr. Hussein allegedly issued.

That attack killed about 5,000 Kurds, according to American officials, mostly children and women who remained in the northern town.

But using chemical weapons against the Shiite population in the south, particularly when American forces are in the area, would be a major departure in strategy. If Mr. Hussein's forces executed such an attack, it would prove that he has the weapons that the United States has accused him of holding, and thus help justify the war.

That could explain, officials here say, why no chemical weapons have been used so far.

By making the allegation public, Mr. Powell and other officials seemed to be trying to defuse the possibility that such an attack would be carried out -- or at least that it could be attributed to American troops. Mr. Powell said of Mr. Hussein, ''He has to be careful here, because the world knows he's done it before, and were he to do it again, it would be immediate acknowledgment of the fact that he has weapons of mass destruction of the kind he has been swearing he does not have.''
