

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BRITAIN; Blair, Despite a Dubious Public, Sticks to Firm Stance on Iraq
By Warren Hoge
Feb. 4, 2003

Prime Minister Tony Blair, facing a public largely opposed to war in Iraq and critical legislators in the House of Commons, said today that Britain and the United States would not back down on their insistence that the time has come for Saddam Hussein to disarm or be disarmed by force.

Reporting on his talks with President Bush at the White House on Friday, Mr. Blair said, ''Show weakness now, and no one will ever believe us when we try to show strength in the future.''

Challenging those who question his view that Mr. Hussein is a threat to Britain's security, Mr. Blair said he preferred to sacrifice popularity now than to one day have to explain why he had not acted to forestall a terror atrocity while there had still been time.

Since his return from Washington over the weekend, Mr. Blair has conducted a round of lobbying for the British-American position with government leaders in Europe and the Middle East.

He travels to France on Tuesday to meet with President Jacques Chirac, whose support is vital since France has a veto on the Security Council. Mr. Blair said he had spoken to the French president this morning and planned to talk to another veto-bearing president later today, Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

Relations between France and Britain have been troubled in recent months, and the summit meeting, in Le Touquet, is a rescheduled version of an annual December bilateral meeting that Mr. Chirac called off in a fit of anger over feeling slighted by the British at a European Union meeting in Brussels in October.

Last week, Britain helped organize an open letter of support for the United States signed by eight European countries eager to separate themselves from French and German statements questioning American leadership. Mr. Blair is said to believe that on Iraq, he can bring Mr. Chirac around by arguing that a failure of the United Nations to follow through on its resolve to disarm Mr. Hussein would undermine the world body itself, an institution cherished by French diplomats.

Mr. Blair adopted that line of argument in the House today, telling one of his questioners that United Nations inaction could reduce the organization to ''League of Nations status.''

In his statement to the House, Mr. Blair said there was no question that Mr. Hussein was defying the United Nations and that this noncooperation constituted a violation of the Security Council resolution on disarmament.

''There is a huge infrastructure of deception and concealment designed to prevent the inspectors from doing their job,'' he said. He said that Iraq had failed to account for thousands of missing munitions and tons of chemical and biological agents.

Bringing up an issue where Britain has its most serious disagreement with the United States, Mr. Blair said he gained assurances in Washington that there would be a more robust effort than there had been to reinvigorate Middle East peace talks. ''I am more hopeful that in the medium term we can make some real progress there than I have been in some time,'' he said.

Britain has argued that the absence of an appearance of an even-handed Western commitment to peace between Israel and the Palestinians was damaging the effort to build a coalition behind action against Iraq.

Asked if any war were not in the end an effort to gain access to Iraqi oil, Mr. Blair dismissed the notion as ''one of the most absurd conspiracy theories ever.''
