

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IMPACT; U.N. Study Sees 500,000 Iraqis Facing Injury In Case of War
By Julia Preston
Jan. 8, 2003

As many as 500,000 people in Iraq could suffer injuries and require medical treatment if the United States and its allies launch a war there, according to a confidential United Nations contingency planning report made public today.

The document, called ''Likely Humanitarian Scenarios,'' was posted on a Web site by a British student group, Campaign Against Sanctions on Iraq, which is concerned about the impact of United Nations sanctions against Iraq. The group did not explain how it had obtained the document.

United Nations planners paint a dire picture of Iraq after extensive bombing and ground fighting. The large casualty estimate is based on this scenario, which would involve far greater loss of life than the narrow bombing campaign conducted in the American-led Persian Gulf war in 1991.

''It is also likely that in the early stages there will be a large segment of the population requiring treatment for traumatic injuries, either directly conflict-induced or from the resulting devastation,'' the report says, warning that half a million people ''could require treatment to a greater or lesser degree as a result of direct or indirect injuries.''

The report also estimates that about three million people across the country will face ''dire'' malnutrition and require ''therapeutic feeding.'' It paints a picture of a crippled nation with its roads, bridges and railroads shattered, its electricity grid badly damaged and its oil industry battered and paralyzed.

The report warns that ''the outbreak of diseases in epidemic if not pandemic proportions is very likely,'' citing the risk of cholera and dysentery.

United Nations officials declined to identify which agency of the organization had produced the report. But a spokeswoman noted that it was common for the United Nations to make assessments in advance of the human needs that might arise in war crises where it will be involved.

''Any well-run organization has to be prepared for disasters that may occur while hoping they do not,'' said the spokeswoman, Hua Jiang. She added that the world organization ''hopes there will be full compliance with Security Council resolutions and consequently no new crisis.''

The report predicts that the warfare will be much more damaging to the civilian population than in the gulf war of 1991, evolving beyond a bombing campaign with narrow targets to ''potentially a large-scale and protracted ground offensive.'' Infrastructure could be damaged by allied bombing or ''the withdrawing government forces,'' the document says.

As many as 900,000 refugees could require food and shelter from the United Nations and other relief groups, the report warns. It also foresees the need to set up transit camps near the Iraqi border for as many as 500,000 people. The document warns that injuries from land mines could increase dramatically.

It notes that the civilian population in Iraq is much more dependent on handouts from the government now than in 1991, before severe economic sanctions had made a deep impact.

The report assumes that international relief agencies will be forced to carry a much greater burden to care for the population if President Saddam Hussein's government is attacked and stops its services.

The United Nations runs Iraq's oil-for-food program, which uses revenue from Iraqi oil sales to buy food and medicine for the civilian population. In view of the large numbers of civilians who could be caught up in a war to topple Mr. Hussein's government and need help from the United Nations, aid officials here started planning several months ago for a possible conflict.
