

THREATS AND RESPONSES: POLITICS; Clinton Tells Blair's Labor Party He Backs Tough U.N. Resolution on Iraq Inspections
By Warren Hoge
Oct. 3, 2002

Former President Bill Clinton expressed strong support today for President Bush's goal of a tough new United Nations resolution on arms inspections in Iraq, but he warned that pre-emptive military actions held unwanted dangers.

Addressing the British Labor Party annual conference, which gave him a rapturous welcome, Mr. Clinton said: ''We need a strong resolution calling for unrestricted inspections. The restrictions imposed in 1998 are unacceptable and won't do the job.'' Any new one, he said, should have a strict deadline and ''no lack of clarity about what Iraq must do.''

His call came after Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said Britain would be pressing for ''much tougher'' weapons inspections than the ''defective'' ones agreed to by Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations inspection group, and Baghdad officials in Vienna on Tuesday.

Mr. Clinton coupled his endorsement of the American-British diplomatic effort in the United Nations with his hope that military action would be a last resort.

''Pre-emptive action today may come back with unwelcome consequences in the future,'' he said, ''because, I don't care -- and I have done this, I have ordered this kind of action -- I don't care how precise your bombs and weapons are, when you set them off, innocent people die.''

Mr. Clinton was today's keynote speaker at the invitation of Prime Minister Tony Blair, his old friend and fellow crusader for a center-left political path they call the ''third way.'' His appearance on stage brought the crowd to their feet for a prolonged ovation filled with cheering and waving. ''It's fun to be in a place where our crowd's still in office,'' he said, beaming.

Tuesday night he and his traveling companion, the actor Kevin Spacey, toured conference parties, pressing the flesh, trading jokes and otherwise dazzling this glamour-deficient Irish Sea resort. At night's end, they dropped into a downtown McDonald's.

Mr. Clinton said today that he was aware of -- and shared -- delegates' differences with the Bush administration over issues like the environment, arms control and international justice, but he urged them to ''reach across'' party and philosophic divides to work with America.

Conscious of the uneasiness that many in the Labor Party feel over Mr. Blair's stance on Iraq, Mr. Clinton argued that things were always better when someone succeeded in bringing the United States and Britain together around a common purpose. ''I ask you to support him as he makes that effort,'' he declared.

He implicitly criticized Mr. Bush on Iraq, noting areas where he thought current policy was wanting: He said the most important anti-terror mission should be wiping out Al Qaeda; he argued for more American involvement in the rebuilding of Afghanistan; and he said his main hope for the inspections was that they would succeed in eliminating the need for armed conflict. More pointedly, he commented that America should not seek to influence the world in a domineering way -- to ''have our own say all the time.''

He said he was now a retired politician, but he took a parting shot at the conservative opponents he and his Labor listeners share.

''I understand that your Tories are calling themselves compassionate conservatives,'' he said to laughter. ''I admire a good phrase. I respect as a matter of professional art, adroit rhetoric, and I know that all politics is a combination of rhetoric and reality. Here's what I want you to know: the rhetoric is compassionate, the reality is conservative.''
