
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DISPLACED IRAQIS; Iraqi City Seen as Powder Keg If Hussein Were to Be Ousted
By James Dao
Oct. 22, 2002

The Iraqi government has displaced or relocated nearly a million Iraqis in the last three decades, creating deep regional and ethnic fractures that could erupt into civil war if President Saddam Hussein is deposed, according to a new report.

The report, by the Brookings Institution and the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies, says a vast majority of Iraq's internally displaced people are Kurds from northern Iraq whose villages have been razed or mined by the Iraqi military and who have been forced to live in temporary, typically ramshackle communities.

If Mr. Hussein is ousted, the report says, any effort by the Kurds or other ethnic groups to regain control of the fertile, oil-rich northern city of Kirkuk could set off conflict.

''It's a point of vulnerability that could easily undermine the stability of the country or even the region,'' said Roberta Cohen, co-director of the Brookings-Johns Hopkins project on internal displacement. ''You can't just have people rushing back to Kirkuk to reclaim it. You need some organized, managed return.''

The report, the most comprehensive survey of displaced Iraqis in recent years, says that Mr. Hussein was the major architect of Iraq's displacement policies, which were aimed at gaining control of oil resources and strengthening Iraq's Sunni minority. It suggests that only a new government can be expected to address the needs of Iraq's displaced people.

''In Iraq, over the last 30 years, there has never been a time when one group or another was not being expelled from their homes,'' the authors of the report, John Fawcett and Victor Tanner, wrote in a draft version.

The report also urges the United Nations and international aid groups to prepare plans to help stabilize Iraq if Mr. Hussein is removed, perhaps by acting as ''confidence-building observers and even referees'' for return or compensation programs. But the authors said the United States and its allies should not try to control such programs.

The report underscores a rising tide of concern among Iraq's neighbors, international aid groups and foreign policy experts about the chaos that could be unleashed if the United States forcefully deposes Mr. Hussein.

Some aid groups have begun making preparations for delivering food, clothing and medical supplies to Iraq if war breaks out. The groups questioned whether the Bush administration was developing relief plans and complained that their efforts to coordinate with Washington had been rejected.

Officials in the administration, sensitive about any discussion of postwar planning for Iraq, have declined to say whether they are making preparations for relief programs.

The United Nations has also begun developing contingency plans for providing relief to Iraq in the event of war, officials said, and has installed Ramiro Lopes da Silva as its highest official in Iraq. It was he who organized the delivery of aid supplies to Afghanistan during the American bombing campaign there last year.

''The degree of the problem depends on how quickly the U.S. and humanitarian organizations get aid in to meet the needs of displaced people,'' said Kenneth H. Bacon, the president of Refugees International. ''The time to start thinking about it is now.''

Mr. Bacon and the officials of other aid organizations estimate that as many as 1.5 million people will try to flee Iraq if war breaks out and that seven million to eight million Iraqis will go hungry without foreign aid. Iran and Turkey have both said they are bracing for a flood of refugees.
