

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE MONEY TRAIL; Officials Say They Broke Up Network That Sent Money to Iraq
By Eric Lichtblau
Dec. 20, 2002

Officials investigating terrorist finances said today that they had broken up a money-laundering operation that had illegally funneled at least $12 million in cash and goods to Iraq in violation of United States sanctions.

Six people were arrested, and another six were indicted overseas in an inquiry that reached from Seattle, where officials said the operation was run, to England, Jordan, the United Arab Emirates and Baghdad.

The case represents a major instance of money laundering that involves Iraq, Treasury Department officials said. It is illegal to send money or materials to Iraq under a declaration issued by President George Bush on Aug. 13, 1990.

The arrests are the latest in a series of crackdowns on the suspicious transfers of money to people or countries that support terrorism. This week, officials investigating terrorist finance connections arrested 13 people in Buffalo, Dallas and Detroit in cases involving money laundering and illegal exports Two weeks ago, federal agents raided a Boston computer company that they said might have had financial ties to supporters of Al Qaeda.

Federal efforts to crack the money pipeline that fuels terrorism have been hobbled for months by complaints of turf battles among agencies, legal and regulatory hurdles and a lack of cooperation from some allied nations, officials said.

The timing of the crackdown was largely coincidental, as separate investigations that started months or in some cases years ago ended nearly simultaneously.

The arrests today and the earlier actions send a very strong message, said Michael Chertoff, assistant attorney general in charge of the criminal division of the Justice Department.

''We will hunt from coast to coast, anywhere in the country, those who violate the laws that prohibit illegal transfer of money overseas, whether they be in Dallas or Detroit or Buffalo or in Seattle,'' Mr. Chertoff said.

The most recent arrests center on a financial company run in Edmonds, a suburb of Seattle, by an Iraqi refugee, Hussain Alshafei. Officials said that in the last several years Mr. Alshafei collected $28 million from Iraqis and others in the United States and, using intermediaries, routed it through Europe and elsewhere to Iraq. At least $12 million in cash, electronics and other items went to Iraq, officials said.

The authorities are uncertain where the money ended up, in part because they made the arrests earlier than expected because of a risk that suspects might flee, officials said. The investigation took on a greater urgency because of the prospect of war with Iraq and the desire to cut off support to Baghdad, officials acknowledged.

A law enforcement official said there was some evidence that the money might have been used to support terrorists and Saddam Hussein's government. Although no firm links have been established, the official said, the terrorist finance-hunting arm of the Customs Service ''wouldn't be involved if we didn't think that were still a possibility.''

Investigators are also trying to determine whether any money went to buy weapons or military supplies, officials said.

When Customs agents served warrants on Mr. Alshafei's company, Alshafei Family Contact Inc., in February, his family told reporters in Seattle that the business intended to help Iraqis here send money to family members and people in need at home. Family members did not respond to requests for comment.

Also arrested were Malik al-Maliki in Roanoke, Va.; Kaalid Amen in St. Louis; Salam Said al-Khursan in Dallas; Ali Noor al-Sutani in Nashville; and Ali al-Marhoun in Phoenix.
