

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NEW YORK REGION; Democrats Are Divided in Debate on Force Against Iraq
By Raymond Hernandez
Oct. 4, 2002

The debate in Congress over authorizing President Bush to use force against Iraq is deeply dividing Democratic lawmakers from the New York City region, reflecting the dilemma the party faces nationally over what to do about Saddam Hussein.

The debate took on greater urgency today after an agreement that President Bush and leaders of both political parties in the House reached on Wednesday detailing a resolution that would authorize him to use force against Iraq.

Democrats here acknowledged that the agreement set the stage for approval of a joint Congressional resolution supporting action against Saddam Hussein.

Even as one Republican after another from the New York region supported the proposal, many of the region's Democrats expressed deep misgivings about how they would ultimately stand on an issue that may be the most important they confront.

In an interview today, Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York appeared to reflect the reservations many of his colleagues have about the proposal reached this week to give the president broad authority to decide when and under what conditions to wage war against Iraq.

Mr. Schumer, for example, said he would be more inclined to support a military strike against Iraq to disarm Saddam Hussein rather than to overthrow him, as the Bush administration has argued. ''Most everyone realizes you have to do something about Saddam Hussein,'' he said. ''The debate among Democrats is how and when.''

Representative Rosa L. DeLauro, a Democrat from New Haven who is the assistant minority leader, was also undecided about the proposed resolution, saying that she wanted to be sure ''we are seeking to work with U.N. sanction, that we are working to gain allied support, that the cost afterward will be broadly shared, and that we do not neglect the wider war on terrorism.''

There are a handful of leading Democrats from the region, most notably Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who support the deal struck between Mr. Bush and the House. In fact, Mr. Lieberman joined with two Republican senators, John McCain of Arizona and John W. Warner of Virginia, in introducing in the Senate a version of the resolution that the House and White House had agreed upon.

The loudest protests to giving the president wide latitude to wage war are coming from many black and liberal lawmakers from the region.

Representative Major R. Owens of Brooklyn, who said he would vote against the proposal, questioned the timing of the debate over Iraq. He noted that it comes as lawmakers are heading into the November elections, when control of the House and Senate is at stake.

Mr. Owens also said that the Bush administration was fueling talk of war to divert the public's attention from concerns at home, like the sluggish economy. ''I think the administration is trying to drive the country hysterical into a situation that will make us forget our domestic problems,'' he said. ''It's very political.''

There is even misgiving among Democrats who finally decided to vote for the resolution agreed upon by the White House and the House leadership. Representative Gary L. Ackerman of Queens expressed concern that the Bush administration would not pursue all diplomatic channels available before waging war.

''It's a very difficult decision,'' Mr. Ackerman said. ''The political concerns are huge. I would have been more comfortable putting this in the hands of an administration that had fewer cowboys and more diplomats.''
