

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE TERRORISTS; Tape Ascribed to bin Laden Urges Muslims to Stand With Iraq
By Neil MacFarquhar
Feb. 12, 2003

A recorded message apparently made by Osama bin Laden called on Muslims today to repulse any United States attempt to invade Iraq, urging them to apply the lessons learned by Al Qaeda, his terror network.

The message stressed that no matter how distasteful it might be to believers, fighting on the same side of godless regimes like that of Saddam Hussein was justified by the greater good of battling the United States.

''This crusader war is mainly targeting Muslims, regardless of Saddam and the socialist party,'' said the speaker, believed to be Mr. bin Laden, in an apparent reference to Iraq's ruling Baath Party.

''The fighting should be in the name of God only, not in the name of national ideologies, nor to seek victory for the ignorant governments that rule all Arab states, including Iraq,'' the speaker said. ''All Muslims have to begin jihad against this unjust war.''

The 16-minute audiotape was broadcast by Al Jazeera, the Arab satellite television station, on the Feast of Sacrifice, the Muslims' most important holiday. It offered little evidence of an alliance between Mr. Hussein and Mr. bin Laden, but it did seem to validate Arab leaders' warnings that Islamic extremists would exploit any assault on Baghdad to further inflame the region. Mr. bin Laden called for the overthrow of Arab regimes in the atmosphere being engendered by the confrontation over Iraq.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, revealing the existence of the tape in testimony before the Senate Budget Committee, seized on it as evidence that Al Qaeda and Iraq are in league against the West.

Mr. Powell said the tape was believed to be authentic. It was the first message from Mr. bin Laden since November, when he praised a spate of terror attacks around the world.

Al Jazeera said today's tape had been received along the same route as the last one, but would not give further details.

Speaking in Arabic, his comments containing pious expressions and examples drawn from historical Muslim conquests, Mr. bin Laden urged Iraqis to wear down the American forces through extended urban warfare.

''Our mujahedeen brothers in Iraq, do not be horrified about what America is propagating about their force, smart bombs, laser-directed bombs,'' he said. ''These smart bombs have no effect in mountains and caves, forests, they need very obvious targets to be effective. Camouflaged targets cannot be hit by either smart bombs or stupid bombs.''

Mr. bin Laden, who American officials believe may be hiding in western Pakistan, repeatedly boasted about the ability of his fighters to survive American assaults. He described the assault on Iraq as partly an effort to seize its oil assets and partly a vendetta by Bush family, neither cause likely to inspire American soldiers to fight very hard.

''We advise you of the importance of luring them into prolonged, hand-to-hand combat, a draining fight,'' he said. ''They fear nothing more than urban and street warfare because they cannot face many losses.''

He also stressed the effectiveness of suicide attacks, citing their use against the United States and Israel.

Mr. bin Laden, quoting a Koranic verse against taking Christians and Jews as allies, also threatened Arab and other regimes who he said were close to Washington.

He said Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Morocco, Pakistan and Nigeria were ripe for being ''liberated from the slavery of these ruling, apostate, unjust regimes who are enslaved by America.''
