

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WASHINGTON'S RESPONSE; Powell Says More Inspectors in Iraq Are 'Not the Answer'
By Steven R. Weisman
Feb. 15, 2003

A different face of Colin L. Powell was on view today -- not the confident, smiling, bear-hugging secretary of state accepting compliments all around the United Nations Security Council after his presentation of the case against Saddam Hussein a week and a half ago.

By turns combative, sarcastic and imploring, Mr. Powell was today defending himself against an onslaught of rebuttals to some of his best arguments from France, Germany, Russia, China and others, and even from Hans Blix, who reported that United Nations inspectors had made progress and intimated that they needed more time.

Mr. Blix, the chief inspector of chemical and biological weapons, did not issue the clarion declaration of Iraqi noncompliance that the Bush team had hoped for and perhaps expected. Instead, he said that ''misinterpretation can occur'' over the kind of evidence Mr. Powell presented last week. It was the opposite of what the White House wanted to hear.

''We are facing a difficult situation,'' Mr. Powell told the Council.

''More inspectors -- sorry, it's not the answer,'' he declared as he looked around at his colleagues. ''What we need is immediate cooperation.''

In an unusual departure, the secretary spoke extemporaneously, gesturing as he glared at others in the room, and using colloquial language that abandoned diplomatic niceties and reflected his exasperation. ''It isn't brain surgery!'' he snapped at one point.

Yet for all his tough words, it seems unlikely that Mr. Powell's argument for a second Security Council resolution authorizing force will have the votes to pass in the Council if it is submitted next week, as American and British officials earlier said was planned.

Indeed, the secretary spoke afterward in vague terms about when the United States would push for such a resolution, leaving doubt about whether such a push would come at all if it was destined to be defeated.

He said he would return to Washington to consult with President Bush and Council members before announcing a decision.

Another open question this evening was the potential effect of today's events on Mr. Powell's standing within the administration, where he has continuously pressed for more efforts to listen to the complaints of France, Germany and other Europeans in the long process of getting United Nations participation on Iraq.

Administration officials have been saying for a couple of weeks that the rebuff to Washington from France and Germany could hasten the timetable toward war, rather than slow it down, by strengthening the hand of hawks who have argued that the United States must act unilaterally or only with like-minded friends.

Clearly conscious of the respect he commands at the Council, Mr. Powell seemed to be trying to strengthen his arguments by employing his personal reputation as a soldier who hates war and as the Bush administration's leading advocate of inspections and working with the United Nations.

''I submit to you no one worked harder, if I may humbly say, than I did to try to put forward a resolution calling for a peaceful resolution on Iraq,'' he said.

''Force should always be a last resort -- I have preached this for most of my professional life as a soldier and as a diplomat,'' he said in another personal aside a minute later. ''But it must be a resort. We cannot allow this process to be endlessly strung out, as Iraq is trying to do right now.''
