

As Bush Campaigns, Cheney Talks of Iraq
By David E. Sanger
Aug. 30, 2002

President Bush traveled to Oklahoma and Arkansas today to raise $1.1 million for Republican candidates, and he joined a back-to-school event to press his education agenda, even as his vice president was talking about whether the country needed to go to war.

Mr. Bush repeated standard lines about the fight against terrorism at all his stops, his only public events this week, but he never mentioned Iraq or Saddam Hussein.

Vice President Dick Cheney, in contrast, used a meeting of Korean War veterans in San Antonio to repeat the arguments he made on Monday that Mr. Hussein could acquire nuclear weapons ''fairly soon'' and that American forces might be called on to prevent that.

As the debate over Iraq grows, Mr. Bush shows no sign of letting it distract him from helping Republicans try to recapture the Senate and maintain control of the House. He is planning two to three campaign-related trips a week from now to the November election.

Most of the trips focus on tight races like the one here in Arkansas, where Mr. Bush spoke tonight at a fund-raiser for Senator Tim Hutchinson, who is being challenged by Mark Pryor, the Democratic attorney general of Arkansas. The Senate contest here is considered one of the most crucial of the year, and Mr. Bush was raising $600,000 this evening at a $500-a-plate dinner in the shadow of the Capitol, where Bill Clinton began his political career.

Mr. Bush has raised more than $100 million this year, appearing at roughly 50 fund-raisers, a record that puts him well ahead of Mr. Clinton at an equivalent moment in his presidency. The White House is determined to avoid the position Mr. Clinton found himself in two years into his presidency when his party lost control of both houses of Congress.

But that has left to the vice president the job of making the administration's public case on Iraq. Tonight, the president alluded to the issue, mentioning speculation in the press about what his next step would be in the fight against terrorism, but he did not specifically mention Iraq.

Mr. Bush had not been seen in public since last Saturday, and today's appearance will be his only one this week. He is to return to Washington on Sunday and make a quick Labor Day trip to Pittsburgh on Monday to talk about the economy.

Mr. Bush began the day in Oklahoma City at a luncheon for Steve Largent, the former professional football player who is the Republican candidate for governor. The current governor, Frank Keating, also a Republican, could not run because of term limits. Mr. Largent appears ahead in the race. The lunch, which also benefited Senator James M. Inhofe, raised about $500,000, and Mr. Bush used a 30-minute speech to talk about worker compensation, energy, prescription drugs and defense spending.

Then Mr. Bush came to Little Rock, stopping at the Parkview Arts and Science Magnet High School to announce that Arkansas would be among a small group of states in a new program to encourage high school students to take more rigorous courses. The program is based on one in Texas when Mr. Bush was governor. But announcing the program here also served another purpose: whenever the president travels to deliver a noncampaign message, the federal government pays for much of the trip.
