

5 Who Attacked Iraqi Embassy Had Sought Asylum in Germany
By Steven Erlanger
Aug. 22, 2002


The five men who seized the Iraqi Embassy in Berlin on Tuesday appeared in court today and were described as recent asylum seekers in Germany, while the top Iraqi diplomat here characterized them as ''gangsters, paid mercenaries, who were getting their orders from outside, on their cellphones.''

The diplomat, Shamil al-Muhammad, was asked if the men were Kurds. He said that he could not tell, but that they spoke Arabic and ''appeared to be of Iraqi origin.''

The attack, Mr. Muhammad said, ''was aimed not only against Iraq but also against Germany.'' He praised the actions of the German police and the policy of the German chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, who has warned against an American-led war with Iraq and has ruled out German military participation.

Like the Iraqi Foreign Ministry on Tuesday, he said Israel and the United States were behind the action, a charge both countries deny.

The men who took the embassy called themselves the Democratic Iraqi Opposition of Germany and called for the end of ''the terrorist regime of Saddam Hussein and his killers.'' The seizure, the group said in a statement, ''is intended to make the German people, its organizations and its political powers understand that our people have the desire to be free and will act on it.''

The five hostage-takers range in age from 32 to 43 and had been living at a hostel for asylum seekers in Brandenburg state, which surrounds Berlin, said Ariane Faust, a spokeswoman for the Berlin judiciary. Four registered as asylum seekers in Berlin in March, and the fifth did so last year, she said.

The men's names were not released, and today a judge ordered them detained for further questioning. Iraqi opposition groups, including the main Iraqi National Congress, headed by Ahmad Chalabi, said they did not know the men or the group they said they represented.

But in an interview in Washington, Mr. Chalabi said that a member of his staff had spoken to the hostage-takers. The staff member said that the five men were Iraqis, three from Baghdad and two from Basra. Four, he said, have university degrees. One is an engineer. One, he said, has family members who were executed at the order of Mr. Hussein.

The German police said they were reviewing their security arrangements for embassies. Currently they patrol the embassy neighborhood but do not guard the building.

According to the police and Mr. Muhammad, the five men burst through the gates of the new embassy in a residential area of Berlin, firing two shots and pepper spray. There were seven Iraqis in the building, Mr. Muhammad said, including Iraqi security personnel. The intruders were armed with a pistol, two pepper-gas guns, an electric prod and an small ax. They took four hostages, including Mr. Muhammad, binding them to chairs. ''They told us if we moved we would be shot,'' Mr. Muhammad said.

Mr. Muhammad is due to leave Germany in a week with his wife and two children. ''I have very good memories of my time here and this one will be the top,'' he said. Today, he said, the Foreign Ministry gave him flowers.

Asked if he knew that the Bush administration had condemned the attack, he said, ''Well, I heard this, but I don't know what's behind it. After all, they want to invade my country.''
