

Hussein Voices Solidarity With Palestinians in Annual Speech
Jan. 7, 2002


Saddam Hussein addressed the nation today in his annual Army Day speech, but although his remarks were televised, he did not attend ceremonies at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier here.

In his address he told fellow Iraqis, ''Your nation and its great homeland are also a trust whenever a caller for jihad calls upon you to defend land, honor, sanctities and sanctuaries.''

He made several references to the Palestinians, saying, ''We are with you, though without having our swords.''

He seemed to refer to the United Nations embargo on the sale of military equipment to Iraq as the reason Iraq was not fighting beside the Palestinians, adding, ''But it is the circumstances and the barriers of politics and geography, which you know, that impose this situation.''

In closing his speech, Mr. Hussein said, ''Long Live Palestine, free and Arab from the river to the sea!'' He also invoked disgrace and curses ''upon Zionism and its damned and detestable entity and upon its evil allies.''

He saluted his armed forces, saying, ''Long live the army of Iraq!'' Some diplomatic officials, however, say the Iraqi Army no longer poses any real threat to its neighbors.

There are no official statistics about the size and strength of Iraq's army, but military service still remains a cornerstone of Iraqi life.

The president's speech was followed by a video montage of scenes from the Iran-Iraq war, malnourished babies and the Republican Guard on parade.

Compared with last year's celebrations, this year's Army Day ceremonies were understated. A year ago there was a grand military parade and a long, defiant speech by the president, during which he shot a few rounds from a hunting rifle to prove his good health and banish rumors of his imminent demise.

The vice chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council, Izzat Ibrahim, represented President Hussein, and Deputy Prime Minister Tarik Aziz attended, as did Dr. Houda Saleh Amash, the only female official with the ruling Baath Party present.

At the ceremonies, dignitaries and military officials marched solemnly across miles of red carpet, carefully taped down for the occasion, and a marching band struck up the Iraqi national anthem.

After some taped recitations from the Koran were blasted over the sound system, a wreath was laid in memory of the thousands of Iraqi soldiers who died fighting in the Iran-Iraq and Persian Gulf wars.

Although most Iraqis speak stoically of fearlessness in the face of possible American attacks, there is real concern about renewed military action. Some foreigners here say that whenever they leave their homes with their families in tow, they are met by worried neighbors who fear the foreigners are evacuating in anticipation of an attack.

And with most Iraqis stuck in the grinding poverty of life under economic sanctions, and with the events of Sept. 11 and the subsequent specter of American threats, there is a sense of pessimism quite different from last year's optimistic Army Day declarations.

In an editorial today, Al Thawra, the newspaper of Iraq's Baath party, criticized Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, for a remark he made last week indicating that the American campaign against terrorism would not be over until President Hussein had been toppled. The editorial said ''Lieberman is leading a hostile campaign against some Arab countries, and he is provoking others against Iraq, in particular.''
