


Belgrade Accused of Involvement in Arms Sales to Baghdad
By Daniel Simpson
Oct. 31, 2002

Two years after Slobodan Milosevic was ousted, many features of his rule are still hampering Yugoslavia's integration into the world community -- especially the sale of arms to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

Since the United States uncovered evidence that a state-owned company in Bosnia's Serb republic was shipping weapons material to Iraq with help from Belgrade, officials in Yugoslavia and neighboring Bosnia have tried to repair the damage by firing the people responsible.

But there remain plenty of unanswered questions about the links between an aircraft factory in Bosnia, the Yugoslav state trading company and a ship seized in Croatian waters that was found to contain 208 tons of nitrogen-based explosive powder used for artillery and missiles.

In a confidential complaint sent to senior Yugoslav officials this year and reprinted in the Belgrade weekly Nedeljni Telegraf, the United States said it had evidence that ''a network of Yugoslav firms'' was helping both Iraq and Libya to develop missiles.

But American officials have repeatedly declined to comment on the charges, which cover technologies that could bew used to deliver weapons of mass destruction and are subject to export restrictions under the 1987 Missile Technology Control Regime. Violations of that embargo would put Yugoslavia at risk of American sanctions, but diplomats stress that such an outcome is not being considered at this stage.

''We have been encouraged by the response so far,'' a Western diplomat said. ''We have to give them time to complete investigations, but we are pressing them every day.''

Military experts in Serbia, the dominant republic in what was left of Yugoslavia after the Balkan wars of the 1990's, question whether the country has the ability to supply cruise missiles to anyone.

''There is definitely not the technological capability to produce cruise missiles here, and I doubt that Yugoslavia even has the know-how,'' a retired senior Yugoslav military official said.

Yugoslavia's military links to Baghdad date to the 1980's, when American, French and British companies also armed Mr. Hussein's Iraq against Iran.

But concrete evidence that this trade was continuing was amassed only last week when NATO troops raided the offices of Orao, a state-run aviation company in Bosnia that has retained close links to Belgrade.

Diplomats said papers seized from Orao showed that it was continuing to send spare parts and technicians to Baghdad to refit an aging Soviet-era fleet of MIG-21 planes.

But when the Croatian police, acting on American intelligence, impounded and searched a ship in the port of Rijeka, they said they had found nothing that could be linked to aircraft or their engines.

According to officials quoted by the Croatian magazine Nacional, the Tonga-registered Boka Star was carrying nitric acid, which can be mixed with kerosene to obtain fuel for Scud missiles, which Iraq fired into Israel during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

Whatever the actual nature of the weaponry being sold, the greatest source of concern for American officials has been the involvement of Yugoimport, a state-run trading company whose director was fired last week for his role in the affair.

Although no one is accusing the Belgrade government of approving trade with Baghdad, its failure to clamp down has exposed its reluctance to tackle reforms of its military apparatus and the enduring presence of many Milosevic-era personnel.
