
Blair Defends U.S. on Iraq, Reaffirming His Support
By Sarah Lyall
Sept. 4, 2002

Prime Minister Tony Blair today disputed reports that a rift had developed between Britain and the United States over Iraq and said that much of the criticism against President Bush's Iraq policy in Europe was ''just straightforward anti-Americanism.''

''I would never support anything I thought was wrong out of some blind loyalty to the U.S.,'' he said, speaking at a news conference in Sedgefield, the district he represents in Parliament.

''Was Sept. 11 a threat to British national security or not?'' he said. ''My answer to that is yes. It wasn't just a threat to America -- they can perfectly easily have done it in London or Berlin or Paris or anywhere. And therefore it's right that we respond to it together.

''If Britain and if Europe want to be taken seriously as people facing up to these issues do, then our place is facing them with America -- in partnership, but with America.''

Mr. Blair also denounced Saddam Hussein and said that ''the threat posed by the current Iraqi regime is real.''

''Either the regime starts to function in a completely different way, or the regime changes,'' he warned.

He promised that the British government would, in the next few weeks, publish a dossier outlining Mr. Hussein's program to develop biological, chemical and nuclear weapons. ''I think that when that happens, people will see that there is no doubt at all,'' he said.

''The United Nations resolutions he stands in breach of are there for a purpose.''

Mr. Blair said that he and Mr. Bush were ''in constant discussion and have been throughout,'' and stressed that no decision had yet been made on what course of action to take in Iraq.

''How we deal with it, as I have said to you on many occasions, is under discussion,'' he said. ''But that we have to do it is not in doubt. We have to face up to it, we have to deal with it, and we will. The issue is, then: What is the best way of proceeding?''

He said that the Sept. 11 attacks were ''an attack on the whole of the free and civilized world,'' and that America ''should not have to face these problems alone,'' but should be supported by ''the whole of the international community.''

''You would think with the debate going on in the last few weeks, it was somehow us who were in breach of the United Nations resolutions and Saddam who was the one being compliant,'' he said.

He called for Iraq to allow United Nations weapons inspectors to return and to accede to the United Nations' demands without equivocation.

''The Iraqi regime know perfectly well what they have to do,'' he said. ''There is no negotiation about this. They have a complete and total obligation to let the weapons inspectors back in any time, any place, anywhere. They've had that obligation for 10 years. It's there in the United Nations resolutions. It doesn't need to be negotiated.''

''The Americans in raising this issue are not wrong -- they are right,'' he added. ''The reason why our place is beside them in addressing the issue is not because of some misplaced allegiance or because of blind loyalty -- it's because it's the right thing to do.''
