

THREATS AND RESPONSES: IRAQI EXILES; Opposition Leader Fears That U.S. Support Is Waning
By Craig S. Smith
Nov. 26, 2002

Sharif Ali bin Hussein, who harbors hopes of being king of Iraq one day soon, offers a cup of tea in the velvet-draped sitting room of a middle-class apartment house here and advises the United States not to set up a military government in Baghdad.

''It would not be wise for America to play the policeman,'' he said in a recent interview, sitting on a plush settee before a decorative bowl of silver walnuts. ''This isn't a colony. Iraqis must do this job.''

Mr. Ali is chairman of the Iraqi National Congress, a patchwork of opposition groups that hope to build a post-Saddam Hussein government after an American-led invasion. But he fears that while Washington's eagerness to overthrow President Hussein is at a high point, its fascination with the opposition group is at a low.

''You would expect, one or two months before America commits troops to Iraq, that the level of engagement would be much more intense,'' Mr. Ali said, adding that talks these days between the Iraqi National Congress and the State Department are more about petty cash than political reconstruction.

The Bush administration has encouraged Iraq's diverse expatriate opposition groups to work together and it continues to finance groups that study subjects like a transitional justice system or oil policies in Iraq after any war.

But the administration, concerned that the exiles lack broad support inside Iraq, is considering plans to have a multinational agency, backed by an American-led force, run an interim Iraqi government if Mr. Hussein is ousted, administration officials say.

This plan, favored by the State Department, also calls for setting up a successor government, mainly from the people now in the country.

The exile coalition's supporters contend that the State Department and C.I.A. do not trust them and want to weaken the coalition's potential role.

State Department officials argue that the most stable government would be formed mainly by people now living in Iraq, though exiles may play a role.

Continue reading the main story
That scenario infuriates many exiles, particularly those who have waited much of their lives for their day in the Babylonian sun.

Mr. Ali, who left Iraq as an infant after the British-installed monarchy was toppled in a coup, insists there is no one left inside Iraq capable of playing a national role.

''It's a myth that there is an opposition government waiting in the wings in Baghdad,'' he said, sitting beneath an imposing oil painting of his cousin, King Faisal II, who was killed in the 1958 coup. ''Saddam has definitely eliminated those with any atom of independence.''

Mr. Ali's organization has been running a deficit since the end of May, when it stopped receiving American money.

Now it is about to get a fresh grant of $6.5 million, which will last it through January but is not to be spent inside Iraq.

The umbrella group and five other organizations, including Mr. Ali's Constitutional Monarchy Movement, were supposed to hold a convention of Iraqi opposition groups this fall, but the date and place keeps changing because the organizers cannot agree on an agenda or even who should attend.

The meeting is now scheduled for London in December.

He is confident, though, that the disparate groups will meet and hammer out the mechanisms necessary for putting an interim post-Hussein government in place.
