

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE VATICAN; Pope Is Sending Envoy to Baghdad in Effort to Avert a War
By Frank Bruni
Feb. 10, 2003

The Vatican announced today that Pope John Paul II was sending a special envoy to Baghdad to try to persuade Iraq to cooperate fully with weapons inspections and to prevent an American-led military strike.

The announcement came as the pope, in his usual Sunday address in Vatican City, strongly restated his worry over the course that events seemed to be taking, and it represented the boldest step yet in the Vatican's growing diplomatic efforts to avert war.

In a statement released late this morning, Dr. Joaquín Navarro-Valls, the pope's spokesman, said Cardinal Roger Etchegaray, a retired Frenchman who served as the president of the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace, would leave Rome for Baghdad on Monday.

Dr. Navarro-Valls said in the statement, which was issued in Italian, that the goal of the mission was to ''demonstrate to all the plea of the Holy Father in favor of peace and to help Iraqi authorities make a serious reflection on the duty of an effective international commitment based on justice and international rights.''

He went on to say such a reflection would be useful in guaranteeing the Iraqi people ''the supreme good of peace.''

In the last month and a half, the pope, along with other Vatican officials and Roman Catholic leaders here who are close to the Vatican, has repeatedly expressed opposition to a war in Iraq.

''No to war!'' the pope said in a speech on Jan. 13 to ambassadors to the Vatican from around the world. ''War is not always inevitable,'' he added, and is ''always a defeat for humanity.''

More recently, as the Vatican has stepped up its diplomatic efforts, emissaries from nations working to head off a military strike against Iraq have sought to underscore the Vatican's opposition to a war.

On Friday, the German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, met with John Paul in Vatican City, then held a news conference to assert their joint concern over the situation.

Later this week, the pope is expected to meet at the Vatican with Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz of Iraq. Several days after that, he is scheduled to meet with the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan.

The Vatican also opposed the Persian Gulf war in 1991, and that often-articulated position strained diplomatic relations with the United States at the time.

But after the attacks on the United States on Sept. 11, 2001, the pope said nations had a moral and legal right to defend themselves against terrorism. He did not condemn the bombing of Afghanistan, although he did say such military actions must be aimed solely at people with ''criminal culpability'' and not groups of innocent civilians.

Today, the pope used his weekly appearance before crowds in St. Peter's Square to make what was clearly a renewed appeal for a solution to the situation in Iraq that did not involve military force.

''In this hour of international concern, we feel the need to turn ourselves to the Lord to implore the great gift of peace,'' the pope said in Italian.

''The difficulties on the world horizon at the start of this new millennium lead us to believe that only an act from on high can make us hope in a future that is less bleak,'' he added.
