

Turkey Says Debt Negotiations Aren't Linked to Stand on Iraq
By Daniel Simpson
July 18, 2002

Turkey wants the United States to write off more than $4 billion in debt, but government officials said today that they were not naming a price for their support of military action to topple President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

Turkish officials, who publicly oppose any operation against Iraq but privately concede they may be willing to compromise, said they had discussed cancellation of money owed for arms purchases with the deputy defense secretary, Paul D. Wolfowitz, during his talks here.

''The economic support we discussed was independent of any other issue,'' a senior government official said. Ankara also wants Washington to hasten Congressional approval for a $228 million aid package that the Bush administration has earmarked for Turkey, according to officials of both countries.

But the Turkish government was at pains to emphasize that this did not amount to laying down conditions for an operation in which the support of Turkey, NATO's only Muslim member, would be vital.

Before leaving Ankara, Mr. Wolfowitz emphasized that Washington was not asking for Turkey's clear backing for an attack on Iraq.

''We did not come here asking for decisions -- we haven't made our own decisions ourselves,'' Mr. Wolfowitz told reporters in Ankara, the capital. He said that before making such decisions, it was important for Mr. Bush ''to have the benefit of perspectives of key countries who are key partners, and Turkey is as important as any country in figuring out how to grapple with this issue.''

Turkey, mired in its worst recession since 1945 and a political crisis that has brought about early elections, publicly repeated its reservations about a renewed offensive against Iraq after its request for economic assistance.

Mr. Wolfowitz assured the Turks, who say the 1991 Persian Gulf war and subsequent sanctions against Baghdad cost billions of dollars in lost trade, of American support to ease a crippling economic crisis that has made Turkey the International Monetary Fund's biggest debtor.

''Turkey's economic situation is something of great concern to the United States,'' he said.

He also sought to ease Turkish fears that an attack on Iraq could create problems with Kurds who are demanding independence.

Since Kurdish fighters wrested control of northern Iraq from Baghdad after the gulf war, the United States has protected the breakaway region. But Mr. Wolfowitz ruled out the creation of a separate state, which Turkey has long opposed, fearing its own large Kurdish minority would be encouraged to renew a guerrilla struggle for independence.

''There is a lot of agreement with Turkey on what we would like to see after Saddam,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said. ''We're both opposed to Kurdish states. We're both concerned about the rights of minorities.''

He also reminded Turks that they stood to gain from a change of regime in Baghdad, where the Iraqi president was defiant today, insisting there was no way Washington could bring an end to his 23-year rule.

If Iraq were to become a democratic state, ''it won't only be the people of Iraq who benefit from that, it will be the whole world and very much this region,'' Mr. Wolfowitz said. ''Turkey stands to benefit enormously when Iraq becomes a normal country.''
