

Ukraine Protests U.S. Charges on Arms Sales to Iraq, to No Avail
By Michael Wines
Nov. 15, 2002

Ukraine opened a furious counteroffensive this week against American accusations that it had plotted in mid-2000 to subvert a United Nations arms embargo against Iraq, but its arguments appear to leave United States officials unimpressed.

Instead, the officials repeated that Ukraine had yet to offer convincing evidence that the arms sales did not occur, and they said officials had yet to reply to a new round of questions from American and British experts that could lay the charges to rest.

On Tuesday, a top aide to President Leonid D. Kuchma presented the first detailed response to American accusations, disclosed last month, that Mr. Kuchma had personally approved a plot in mid-2000 to smuggle sophisticated antiaircraft radars to Iraq.

In a meeting with reporters, Mr. Kuchma's top aide, Viktor Medvedchuk, conceded that the question of selling the radars to Iraq had been broached in ''unofficial talks'' by the head of the government's arms-export agency. But he said that Ukraine's internal security apparatus had quashed the discussions, and that no sale to Iraq ever took place.

''This was just the question about the possibility of a sale,'' Mr. Medvedchuk said.

''It was at that stage that the security service and the chief intelligence directorate put a stop to the contracts.''

Mr. Medvedchuk also denied a crucial component of the American complaint: that President Kuchma had personally approved the arms sale in a meeting on July 10, 2000, with the government's arms-export director, Valery Malev.

That charge was based on an American analysis of a clandestine recording smuggled from Ukraine two years ago. The analysis concluded that the recording, on which a voice said to be Mr. Kuchma's ordered Mr. Malev to sell the radars, was genuine.

Mr. Medvedchuk confirmed on Tuesday that the two men had met on July 10, but he said, ''No such talks took place or could have taken place.''

The White House sees Ukraine as a potentially important ally and a bridge in the spread of democratic rule from Europe to central Asia. But relations with Mr. Kuchma, never especially warm, have been all but frozen since American analysts verified the recording in late summer.

At Mr. Kuchma's invitation, American and British experts visited Ukraine last month to investigate the radar sales. Their still-unreleased report concluded that Ukraine had given only mixed cooperation, and that it had failed to prove the radars were not smuggled to Iraq.

Reacting to Mr. Medvedchuk's news conference, a senior United States official said Ukraine's denials were unconvincing because the greatest resistance to last month's inquiry came from the highest levels of government. ''The people who weren't cooperative were Kuchma's people,'' the official said.

The air-defense system said to have been sold to Iraq, known as Kolchuga, is a ''passive radar'' that can track approaching aircraft and vehicles and aim weapons without being detected. Rather than bouncing signals off a target, as with conventional radar, the systems pick up the radio signals emitted by most aircraft and other military vehicles.

Without elaborating, the American official said the United States had ''convincing'' evidence such systems are in Iraq, and said analysts had subjected the Kuchma recording to a painstaking analysis.
