

Iraqi Cleric in Iran Welcomes Plans to Oust Hussein
By Nazila Fathi
Aug. 4, 2002

The ayatollah preached before nearly 70 Iraqi fighters this week and told them that America had decided to topple Saddam Hussein, the very goal that he has coveted for years.

Ayatollah Muhammad Bakir al-Hakim, an Iraqi living here, heads the Supreme Assembly of the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a leading Shiite opposition group. It is one of the six opposition groups that the White House has invited to a meeting in Washington that is to begin Friday.

The ayatollah is sending his own representative, and in an interview at his office early this week he welcomed the idea of American intervention to destabilize the Iraqi government, provided it was the Iraqis who carried out the real change.

''The Iraqi people will benefit from any opportunity that weakens Saddam,'' he said. ''They can topple him if they know that he will not be able to suppress them like in 1991.

''The United States can do in Iraq what it did in Kosovo in terms of making sure Saddam would not use its armament, but the change should be made by people themselves, like in Yugoslavia.''

The ayatollah, 63, is popular in Iraq, where more than 50 percent of the people are Shiite Arabs, although it is ruled by a Sunni minority.

Analysts in Iran said Ayatollah Hakim would not cooperate with the United States if Tehran did not approve, although Iran has publicly rebuked American officials for discussing a war against Iraq. Iran and Iraq fought a war from 1980 to 1988.

Iranian leaders have maintained close ties with the ayatollah. He came to Iran in 1981, after war broke out with Iraq.

His father was the teacher of the spearhead of the 1979 revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Also, Ayatollah Hakim was a classmate of Iran's current supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Diplomats say Iran's Revolutionary Guards, controlled directly by Ayatollah Khamenei, train Ayatollah Hakim's troops in Iran.

The dependence of Ayatollah Hakim on the Islamic Republic had stirred concerns that he might favor a religious government. But he has repeatedly rejected the notion.

Ayatollah Hakim cannot be ignored if a coalition of the opposition forces is to be formed. ''The political role of the Shiite community and its leadership is significant, and he has clearly said that the creation of a religious regime is out of the question,'' one Western diplomat said.

The ayatollah has an efficient network, with offices in Beirut, Lebanon; Damascus, Syria; and London. He meets regularly with Western and Arab diplomats.

And he has an effective military force, he explained: a classic-style army based in Iran and guerrilla forces and scattered underground militia forces in Iraq. He refused to give the number of his forces, but estimates vary from as low as 12,000 to as high as 60,000.

His group has good relations with other opposition groups, especially with the Kurdish leaders Jalal Talabani and Massoud Barzani. He said that he and other opposition leaders had agreed on an outline for Iraq's future. An interim government would be established, and all ethnic and religious groups would be represented. A year later, free elections would be held for Parliament.
