

Investing; For Lovers of Risk, There's Iraqi Government Debt
By Conrad De Aenlle
Sept. 22, 2002

FEW investments are expected to benefit from an attack on Iraq, but one obscure asset may be a winner if Saddam Hussein and his government are toppled. That, at least, is the hope of those who hold Iraqi debt.

Offshore mutual funds that concentrate on emerging-markets debt hold Iraqi debt with a face value of roughly $1.2 billion, most of which started as loans from French and Arab banks before 1990. The debt seldom changes hands, and when it does it is shuffled among a few specialist institutions and fetches around 10 cents on the dollar.

Julian Adams, manager of the Aberdeen Exotic Debt fund, which holds Iraqi debt with a face value of about $30 million, said he and the Bush administration share a goal, if for different reasons. ''Don't forget we're on the same side,'' said Mr. Adams, who is based in London. '' 'Regime change' is exactly what we want.''

Mr. Adams says that if Mr. Hussein is removed from power, economic sanctions imposed on Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait in 1990 are likely to be lifted, ultimately pushing up the debt's value. The sanctions have greatly curtailed Iraqi oil sales.

''It's by far the best exotic credit,'' Mr. Adams said, using a term for debt issued by smaller developing countries that is traded infrequently on world markets. ''Essentially, once sanctions get lifted, several things happen. They will get loads of Western aid to rebuild the economy'' and then ''they will work out the debt soon after.''

''As most emerging-debt workouts are done at least at 25 cents on the dollar,'' he added, ''the upside to this is huge.'' A settlement of 25 cents on the dollar would mean a fivefold increase in value after repayment of accumulated interest, he said.

Mr. Adams has placed close to one-fourth of the fund's assets in Iraqi debt. More mainstream funds would never hold so much of a speculative investment, but several funds own it in more modest amounts.

''Iraq certainly has big upside because there are a lot of frozen assets offshore,'' said one fund manager who specializes in emerging-markets debt. ''Restructuring would be expected to happen reasonably fast. Iraq needs to normalize relations with creditors to get cash up front. The debt is a good investment.'' The manager, who holds Iraqi debt in an offshore mutual fund and in several portfolios for institutional clients, spoke on the condition that neither he nor his firm be identified.

The debt will probably benefit from new investor interest, he added, if a United States embargo is lifted and American institutions are allowed to own it. Foreign mutual funds are exempt from the embargo, and American authorities typically grant dispensations that allow small investors in the United States to buy the funds.

Holders of exotic debt have benefited from sweeping political change in the past -- for example, after the downfall of Slobodan Milosevic in Serbia in 2000.

''When Milosevic was booted out, Serbian debt went from 7.5 to 24 in nine months,'' Mr. Adams recalled, saying he sold his holding after the price jump. ''Iraq would do even better.''
