

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; U.S. Compromises to Continue Iraq Oil-for-Food Program
By Julia Preston
Dec. 5, 2002

The United States stepped back from provoking a rift in the Security Council today by reaching a compromise with Russia to extend a huge aid program in Iraq for an additional six months.

The Bush administration dropped its demand to hold up the renewal for two weeks to add 40 items to a list of goods whose purchase by Iraq is restricted under the program. Instead, Washington and Moscow agreed to revise the list in 30 days.

The administration is keen to add the items to the list whose import is controlled or banned under the oil-for-food program because it suspects that Iraq wants to use them for military purposes. The program uses revenues from the sale of Iraqi petroleum, monitored by the United Nations, to buy food, medicine and other supplies for civilians.

The Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution this evening that approves a regular 180-day renewal of the program, preserving the unity that the Council achieved last month in support of Resolution 1441. That resolution set up the tough weapons inspections in Iraq that are entering their second week.

Washington decided not to press for immediate changes to the list of prohibited items after the other 14 members of the Council, led by Russia, complained unusually openly this week that Washington seemed to be delaying a food program vital for ordinary Iraqis as part of its preparations for war.

Among the items that Washington wanted to add to the list are special tubes for electronic equipment, inertial navigation systems that could be used for missiles, activated charcoal and certain phosphate pesticides that could be used for explosives, United States officials said today. They also want to include advanced flight simulators, which are used to train pilots. The administration revised its proposal in response to specific requests that Iraq submitted to the United Nations.

''We want to ensure that the list is not exploited or manipulated by Iraq to extend its conventional or weapons of mass destruction programs,'' the United States ambassador, John D. Negroponte, said after the vote.

Diplomats were relieved that a fight with the United States had been averted at a time the Council seeks to present a united front to Baghdad as the weapons inspectors go about their work.

''It's a good solution,'' a French diplomat said. ''The American delegation listened to the other members and made a reasonable response.''

Russia has also proposed changes to the list, including barring Iraq from buying certain categories of heavy military trucks.

Since December 1996, goods worth $25.6 billion have been delivered under the program, which has improved living conditions for practically all Iraqis, according to a United Nations report. Malnutrition among children in some regions has been halved since 1996, and vast regions have been cleared of land mines.
