

A NATION AT WAR: THE PRISONERS; Marines Find Remains of 4 Soldiers Lost In Iraq Ambush
By Bernard Weinraub
March 29, 2003

The bodies of four American soldiers were found by marines on Friday in a shallow grave in the battle-worn town of Nasiriya, near the Euphrates River.

Military officials said they believe that the four were executed by Iraqi paramilitary forces after they were seized in an ambush on Sunday.

Military officials declined to speculate as to whether the four were among those who were shown alive by Al Jazeera television last weekend. The military had heard reports that the soldiers were executed after they were shown on the Arab network, but there was no confirmation of that.

On Friday a Marine unit found the four bodies in a freshly dug grave near a house in the northeast corner of the town of Al Jazeera. An Army official said that the four were wearing American military uniforms.

Today the military were flying in a forensic team, military investigators and a member of the V Corps Staff Judge Advocate's office to the site. Officers said that the military was tentatively treating the deaths as a war crime.

The soldiers seized in the ambush have been listed as missing in action. The 507th Maintenance Company is attached to the Third Infantry Division.

Officers of V Corps said the names of the dead would be released after their families were notified.

The ambush took place in Nasiriya, in southeastern Iraq.

According to Army officers, soldiers of the 507th Maintenance Unit were traveling on Highway One, a main north-south artery, in darkness in a convoy of six vehicles. The unit was en route to supply an antiaircraft battery.

The convoy took a wrong turn, mistakenly leaving Highway One. Officials said they believed that as the Americans realized their mistake, they turned around and quickly encountered two Iraqi T-55 tanks and an advancing Iraqi military unit. The soldiers came under rocket and small-arms fire.

In the fight that followed, the first of the two cars, a Humvee, the standard Army vehicle and a tool truck, were separated from the other four. An Army captain in the Humvee -- the senior officer -- drove the vehicle carrying wounded soldiers through the gunfire. According to one account, the officer drove nearly four miles before being forced to stop because his tires had been crippled by gunshots.

The officer sought to change the tires of the Humvee, when an American Marine unit on patrol saw him and the soldiers in his vehicle, officers said. The Marines called in a Medevac helicopter, which evacuated the officer and his wounded soldiers. Some were seriously wounded, one of them shot in the jaw.

The Marines resumed their patrol in search of the fedayeen, the paramilitary force. Within minutes, they came upon two American vehicles, damaged by bullets. Two other vehicles were burning. No Americans were in sight.

Hours later, grim photos of American soldiers were shown on Al-Jazeera. Some appeared to have bullet wounds to the head. The uniforms of others were stained with blood.

Within 24 hours, the Army was hearing reports that some of the soldiers had been executed.
