

THE AD CAMPAIGN; Invoking the Image of Hussein
Oct. 5, 2002

Representative John Thune, the Republican running for the Senate in South Dakota, yesterday became the first Senate candidate to use the image of Saddam Hussein in a television advertisement. The ad, paid for by the Thune campaign, claims that Senator Tim Johnson, a Democrat, is soft on missile defense. It can be seen by viewers in half of South Dakota.

PRODUCER: McAuliffe Message Media

ON THE SCREEN: The television commercial opens with an image of Al Qaeda terrorists arming and firing mortars into the distance. An image of Saddam Hussein in a beret pops up alongside it. Next, the scene switches to a series of pictures of a long-range missile flying through the air, belching smoke and fire. Senator Johnson appears on a second screen. He is speaking at an event. The number ''29'' flashes on the screen. The ad ends with an image of Mr. Thune walking with a farmer, followed by a close-up of him.

THE SCRIPT: A solemn voice intones: ''Al Qaeda terrorists. Saddam Hussein. Enemies of America. Working to obtain nuclear weapons. Now more than ever our nation must have a missile defense system to shoot down missiles fired at America. Yet Tim Johnson has voted against a missile defense system 29 different times. One of the most liberal records in Congress. Is this a question of patriotism? No. It's a question of judgment. John Thune supported a missile defense system every time. John Thune: putting national defense and American security first.''

ACCURACY: The ad points to 29 votes that Mr. Johnson cast against a missile defense system. There are, in fact, 29 votes, dating back to 1988. Almost all related to financing the missile defense program. Mr. Johnson voted many times to cut spending on the program or on elements of the program or against funneling more money to national missile defense projects. Most Democrats argued at the time that Congress was spending too much money on national missile defense.

Senator Johnson's aides counter that while he opposed giving more money to missile defense, he voted in 1999 for the overall legislation for the nation's missile program. The next year he voted to secure $6.9 billion for missile defense, followed by $8.3 billion in 2001. More important, his aides said, Mr. Johnson has pledged to support President Bush's resolution for the use of force in Iraq.

While the ad refers to Saddam Hussein aiming missiles at the United States, government officials say Mr. Hussein is unable to send any missile that far.

SCORECARD: The ad, with its gloom and doom scenario, plays on American fears that Saddam Hussein and terrorists from Al Qaeda are building nuclear weapons to annihilate the United States. Polls show that Democrats are sometimes considered less reliable than Republicans in defending the nation -- and the ad clearly tries to put Mr. Johnson in that camp. By backing Mr. Bush on Iraq, Mr. Johnson is seeking to defuse the criticism. It stands out because most politicians have resisted seizing on the threat from Iraq as a campaign issue and have instead pressed domestic concerns.
