

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ARTICLES OF CAPITULATION; Iraqis Told, 'Sign Here' To Surrender -- As Lee Did
By Bernard Weinraub
March 20, 2003

Even before the war starts, the United States Army is telling officers in Iraq to surrender their units by signing ''articles of capitulation.''

In a legal move not used since World War II, the United States has dropped leaflets, sent e-mail messages and even spoken privately to Iraqi officers, urging them to surrender their battalions or brigades or divisions.

Officers at V Corps headquarters here said the articles of capitulation were intended to smooth the way for the Army to push quickly toward Baghdad by leaving the Iraqis in place and assuring the Iraqi commanders that they and their troops would be treated fairly.

A top officer of V Corps said the surrender agreement was shaped to avoid ''death and destruction'' in southern Iraq. The Iraqi troops are being told, essentially, that ''they are not the enemy,'' the officer said. Avoiding destruction in southern Iraq, he said, would leave ports and airports unscathed in the planned reconstruction of Iraq after the war.

Legal officers here said articles of capitulation have been signed before, by Italian commanders supporting Mussolini in World War II and by Robert E. Lee when he surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox.

Officers said one goal was to avoid the turmoil that took place during the Persian Gulf war in 1991, when 60,000 to 70,000 Iraqis were captured -- most of whom surrendered in large numbers. The prisoners were taken to Saudi Arabia, which later released them.

Legal and intelligence officers here said the Iraqi military was fully aware of the articles of capitulation. The six-page document, in English and Arabic, specifies 15 sections that the Iraqi officers must sign.

The first article states that ''All members of [Iraqi unit name/post] will at once cease active operations and any hostile acts against U.S. and coalition forces and will remain in uniform.''

Other articles give specific military directions: ''Turn all gun barrels over the rear deck of the vehicle in a uniform direction. Place all towed artillery and air defense artillery pieces in a passive travel mode. Turn off all radar.''

Another article says Iraqi officers may retain firearms if the United States commander agrees. Iraqi commanders are also informed not to destroy documents and to turn over all military property to the United States forces.

Iraqi officers must also sign an article in which they are compelled to provide the United States with information about subordinates as well as the location of land mines, ''conventional and unconventional weapon bunkers and any other armaments under the control of the capitulating unit.''

Legal officers said the surrendering Iraqi units would be considered prisoners of war. But officials here said there was every intent not to send them to prison camps.

Officials said current plans called for the prisoners to ''stay in place'' where they surrendered, unless they were in danger militarily. Legal officers said the United States would accept the responsibility not only to feed and care for them, if necessary, but also to protect them from other Iraqis.

''We don't want civilians seeking revenge against them,'' one legal officer said.
