

Pentagon Pursues Leak of Anti-Iraq Plan
By David Stout
July 20, 2002

The Pentagon has opened an inquiry to determine who leaked a document outlining how the United States might attack Iraq to topple President Saddam Hussein, officials said today.

The investigation is being handled by the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, whose primary missions are criminal investigation and counterintelligence. The agency is trying to determine the source of an article in The New York Times on July 5 about planning for operations against Iraq.

Using information provided by a source familiar with the military planning and unhappy with its direction, The Times reported that military leaders envisioned an air-, land- and sea-based campaign against Iraq from the north, south and west.

The article listed several countries that might be used as staging areas for the campaign but emphasized that none had been formally consulted about playing such a role and that the planning was preliminary.

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, who has often complained about leaks, said in a memorandum to Pentagon officials on Tuesday that unauthorized disclosure of classified information could help terrorists and put American lives in jeopardy.

''It is wrong,'' Mr. Rumsfeld wrote. ''It is against the law. It costs the lives of Americans. It diminishes our country's chance for success.''

The day before, Mr. Rumsfeld expressed his anger during an interview on CNBC. ''Every once in a while, there are people in the United States government who decide that they want to break federal criminal law and release classified information, and they ought to be imprisoned,'' he said. ''And if we find out who they are, they will be imprisoned.''

A spokesman for The Times said today that while the newspaper could not discuss the nature of its confidential sources, ''we are satisfied that the article we printed on July 5 about contingency planning for action on Iraq was consistent with responsible citizenship.''

''We took appropriate steps to determine that while addressing matters of legitimate public concern, we were not jeopardizing current or prospective military operations,'' the spokesman said.

Bryan Whitman, a deputy assistant secretary of defense for public affairs, said today that he could not comment on the matter in detail. He said that assuming there was such an investigation, it would not be unusual, and that news articles occasionally prompted post-mortems about security procedures.

Maj. Mike Richmond, a spokesman for the Air Force Office of Special Investigations, also declined to comment extensively. ''We don't typically confirm publicly what investigations we are conducting and those we aren't conducting,'' he said, explaining that to do so might tip off potential targets that they were under scrutiny.

An official familiar with the inquiry and the circumstances that prompted it said the fact that it was being handled by an Air Force agency, rather than a comparable unit in another service branch, should not be taken as a sign that high Pentagon officials suspected that the leak came from an Air Force source. The Air Force agency may simply have been the one best able to take on the assignment because of its workload, the official added.
