

Rumsfeld Says Allies Will Support U.S. on Iraq
By Eric Schmitt
Aug. 28, 2002

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said today that America's allies would support the United States if President Bush decides to attack Iraq, saying ''leadership in the right direction finds followers and supporters.''

Most of the nation's allies in Europe and the Middle East have publicly voiced opposition to a war with Iraq, and critics here say the administration's handling of Iraq policy illustrates its tendency to act alone in foreign policy matters.

But Mr. Rumsfeld said the president had not yet decided whether to attack Iraq and oust President Saddam Hussein, so it was premature for Mr. Bush to ask skeptical allies for their backing.

''I don't know how many countries will participate in the event the president does decide that the risks of not acting are greater than the risks of acting,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said, addressing 3,000 marines at Camp Pendleton, Calif. ''But I've found over the years that when our country does make the right judgments, the right decisions, that other countries do cooperate and they do participate.''

''It's less important to have unanimity than it is to be making the right decisions and doing the right thing, even though at the outset it may seem lonesome,'' he added.

Mr. Rumsfeld's remarks came a day after Vice President Dick Cheney offered the administration's most forceful rationale for attacking Iraq, saying that it would not be long before Mr. Hussein develops nuclear weapons and that he had already developed other unconventional weapons that threaten the United States and its allies.

While Mr. Rumsfeld sidestepped several questions about impending action against Baghdad, saying it would only feed a ''frenzy on the subject,'' he echoed many of the arguments Mr. Cheney made to a veterans convention on Monday.

''What's important on Iraq, and on other important questions about terrorist states that are seeking to have weapons of mass destruction, is that our country engage in a somewhat elevated, thoughtful discussion about what free people ought to do given the circumstances of the 21st century,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

''In the 21st century, we're dealing not simply with conventional capabilities but potentially with unconventional capabilities -- with chemical and biological and radiation and nuclear weapons. There you're not talking about sustaining an attack and losing hundreds or a few thousand. You're talking about risking the lives of tens of thousands, and potentially hundreds of thousands of people.''

As if to underscore the growing tension in the Persian Gulf region, American and other coalition warplanes attacked Iraqi radar sites and air defense command posts in both southern and northern Iraq today, after Iraqi forces had fired at the allied planes patrolling the two no-flight zones.

Addressing marines on a sunny parade ground in front of the headquarters of the First Marine Division, which sent troops to Afghanistan and would send more to the Persian Gulf, Mr. Rumsfeld said the American public would back them, just as they had in the campaign against terrorism.

Marines at Camp Pendleton said public support was important, but eliminating the threat of Mr. Hussein's hidden arsenal was paramount.
