

THREATS AND RESPONSES: HUSSEIN'S FUTURE; 2 Arab Nations Deny Reports Of Plans to Oust Iraqi Leader
By John Kifner
Jan. 22, 2003

The foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia and Egypt denied reports today that they were seeking a safe exile haven for President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in order to avert war. But they seemed to leave the door open to a possible military coup.

Prince Saud al-Faisal, the Saudi foreign minister, met here today with President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt amid a flurry of Arab diplomatic initiatives aimed at heading off an American-led invasion of Iraq that many fear could destabilize the Middle East and threaten their governments.

The meeting was held in anticipation of a conference expected to convene shortly in Ankara, Turkey, at the behest of the new Turkish prime minister, Abdullah Gul, with the foreign ministers of Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Iran and Saudi Arabia.

At a news conference after the meeting, both the prince and the Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Maher, were at pains to insist that Iraq's future was in the hands of ''the Iraqi people.'' Exactly what that meant was open to conjecture, since Mr. Hussein's two-decades-long grip on power has permitted no other voices.

There have been persistent reports that the Saudis and others have been trying to persuade Mr. Hussein to go into exile, or, failing that, to foster a coup by military and security forces that would remove him from power.

Prince al-Faisal denied that the subject had been broached. ''Both Saudi Arabia and Egypt agree that changing any political leadership should come from inside the country and not from outside,'' he said, ''and that is why we did not discuss this topic.''

The Egyptian foreign minister, Mr. Maher, struck a similar note. ''The aim is not to interfere in the Iraqi internal affairs,'' he said. ''They are to choose their leadership, and all that we are concerned about is to find a solution that would spare the Iraqi people the danger of a military attack.''

Despite the ministers' protestations of noninterference, there have been reports that Saudi Arabia, increasingly desperate to avoid a war, has engaged in a campaign to incite Iraqi security forces to overthrow Mr. Hussein if he refuses to step down.

Many Arab governments, aligned with or dependent upon America, fear that a war broadcast on satellite television will unleash popular passions tied to what their populations view as the United States' unquestioning support of Israel against the Palestinians.

Meanwhile, another Egyptian initiative on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, an on-again-off-again meeting of Palestinian factions to discuss ending attacks on Israelis, appeared to be going ahead. The talks, scheduled for Cairo on Wednesday, were in danger of being canceled until two factions, Hamas and Islamic Jihad, reversed their initial positions and decided to attend.

In any case, the meeting, which foundered on disagreements about which factions were to be invited, was given little chance for success. The militant groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad have vowed to continue suicide bombings until ''the occupation'' is ended, and Yasir Arafat has lost whatever control he might have exercised over grass-roots militants in Nablus, Jenin and other areas of the West Bank.
