

THREATS AND RESPONSES: FIRST MARINE DIVISION; Marines See Iraqi Army Bound by Fear, Not Loyalty
By John Kifner
March 18, 2003

The marines who will lead the charge toward Baghdad believe that the Iraqi Army will crumble before them, but worry that Saddam Hussein will barricade himself in the city to force a siege and a humanitarian crisis to play to world public opinion.

''That is my fear, quite frankly,'' the colonel in charge of intelligence here at the First Marine Division's forward headquarters said. ''That he pulls back into Baghdad.''

He and other Marine officers here described an Iraqi Army that was poorly equipped and disciplined, but above all, held together only by fear of retribution rather than any sense of loyalty.

''My expectation is that many of the officers will cut and run,'' said the colonel, who asked that his name not be used. ''And given their options, if you are a young Iraqi conscript, what would you do? We think a high percentage will choose not to fight.''

The Iraqi Army's situation, intelligence officers said, is particularly tenuous in the south -- the first target of the marines' probable land attack -- because the officers are from the ruling Sunni Muslim minority while the conscripted soldiers are from the local Shiite majority.

''Mostly the regular army exists to keep the lid on the Shiite population,'' said an intelligence major who has been concentrating on a division and its commander who, he said, was the key to the immediate Iraqi defense. ''Counterinsurgency is their bread and butter.''

But, conceding Mr. Hussein's flair for political theater, the colonel said his ''worst case'' scenario was that the Iraqi dictator would hole up in Baghdad with the remnants of his top loyalists. Senior American military officials have said Baghdad is ringed with air defenses.

In this version, Mr. Hussein would, in effect, hold the population hostage, hoping to turn an already critical world opinion further against the United States.

Like all the marines here and in the surrounding desert in northern Kuwait code-named Coyote, an area now full of soldiers, the colonel is confident in his troops' organization, equipment and fighting ability. But he is also acutely aware that the war itself may be the easy part.

''I'm not worried about the war,'' he said. ''I know what we can do. I'm worried about the aftermath.''

Much of the assessment of the Iraqi Army's capabilities comes from an intelligence program ordered by the division commander, Maj. Gen. James Mattis, called Understudies, in which officers study and play the roles of Iraqi commanders.

Twelve Marine officers -- captains and majors -- are studying 12 Iraqi division and corps commanders. Of the 12 Iraqi commanders, 10 are Sunni and two are Shiite.

The understudies focus particularly on the commanders' tribal affiliations and try to assess the ''tipping point'' at which they might abandon Mr. Hussein.

Each division, the colonel said, was assigned a representative of the Special Security Organization, reporting directly to Mr. Hussein's officials. Once the war begins, the colonel said, ''the life expectancy of these guys is zero. The Iraqi soldiers are going to turn on them in a heartbeat.''
