

White House Denies Texas Session Is About Iraq
By Adam Nagourney
Aug. 21, 2002

The White House vigorously denied today that President Bush had summoned his senior military advisers to his ranch here to map out a potential effort to topple Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq, declaring that the sole purpose of a meeting to be held here Wednesday was to review military procurement, missile defense and Pentagon spending.

''Look, we've had war councils on Iraq, and we let people know,'' said Ari Fleischer, the White House spokesman. ''This is the case of the media chasing its own imagination.''

The meeting came after a week in which Mr. Bush was under pressure to justify the administration's talk of the possibility of a campaign to force Mr. Hussein from power, with some of the challenges from corners of his own party. Mr. Bush has said he would take such arguments into account, but he and aides have strongly signaled that the administration is likely to take some sort of action to remove Mr. Hussein.

The president will be joined at the ranch by Vice President Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser. Lt. Gen. Ronald Kadish, who directs the Pentagon's missile defense program, and J. D. Crouch, an assistant secretary of defense, also will be there.

The State Department said today that Secretary of State Colin L. Powell would not attend and that he and his wife are staying at a friend's home in the Hamptons in New York. A senior department official said Secretary Powell might participate by telephone, though the official said that was unlikely.

Mr. Fleischer, in declaring that Iraq was not the purpose of the gathering, noted that Gen. Tommy R. Franks, the chief of the military's Central Command and the general who would oversee any military action in Iraq, was not attending. ''General Franks is not coming,'' he said. ''And General Franks is in charge of that theater.''

At the Pentagon today, Mr. Rumsfeld echoed Mr. Fleischer, saying that the Crawford meeting would be devoted to budgets and procurement, including missile defense. ''One of the topics is missile defense, where we've reached a point in the evolution of the development of that program that it's appropriate to bring the president up to date,'' he said.

Mr. Rumsfeld, responding to reports of Qaeda operatives in Iraq, said that members of the organization had left Afghanistan and other places and went to a variety of countries, ''one of which is Iraq.''

''I have said repeatedly that there are Al Qaeda in Iraq,'' he added.

Mr. Rumsfeld said nothing special should be made of the location of the session at the president's ranch.

After the meeting, Mr. Rumsfeld will travel to Fort Hood, Tex., to meet military personnel.

Mr. Fleischer also announced today that Mr. Bush would address the United Nations General Assembly on Sept. 12, a day after he goes to New York to mark the anniversary of the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
