
THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Hussein Aide Denounces Powell's Case as Full of Baseless 'Stunts'
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 6, 2003

Iraq tonight denounced as ''manufactured'' and ''baseless'' the arguments made to the United Nations Security Council by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell.

''This was a typical American show, complete with stunts and special effects,'' Gen. Amir al-Saadi, the top science adviser to President Saddam Hussein, told reporters. ''What we heard today was for the general public and mainly the uninformed in order to influence their opinion and to commit the aggression on Iraq.''

Officials described his remarks as an abbreviated rebuttal that Iraq would elaborate on Thursday.

General Saadi did not comment on the most contentious part of Mr. Powell's presentation, that Iraq has strong contacts with Al Qaeda. He said Iraq would refute those allegations fully on Thursday.

Mr. Powell singled out General Saadi, a polished British-educated chemist, saying his job as Iraq's chief liaison to the United Nations was ''to deceive'' the inspectors searching for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq since November.

''Absolute nonsense,'' General Saadi retorted in his flawless English. ''It's simply not true.''

The immediate effect of Mr. Powell's presentation may be to increase the pressure on Iraq to make concessions, possibly major ones, if it is to avoid an American attack.

This weekend, the two top United Nations arms inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei will return to Baghdad. They have said they expect Iraq to demonstrate a greater willingness to cooperate fully with the inspections.

While the inspectors and the Bush administration differ on the degree to which Iraq has obstructed the inspections, they agree that Iraq has balked on several key points, including making Iraqi scientists available to speak to inspectors in private and allowing surveillance by U-2 spy planes.

On the intercepted telephone conversations, which Mr. Powell said showed that Iraq had hidden prohibited weapons, General Saadi said they were ''simply not true and not genuine.''

''Any third-rate intelligence outfit could produce such a recording,'' he said. ''We have nothing to hide.''
He said inspectors already had the satellite photographs and had inspected the sites that Mr. Powell said showed alterations to depots where biological or chemical arms were stored.

''Everything was explained and is in their reports,'' the general said of the inspectors. ''That again was something which was absolutely unfounded.''

He said inspections showed that no weapons had been placed in any of Mr. Hussein's presidential palaces, and he strongly denied the allegation that Iraq had issued a fake death certificate for an Iraqi scientist.

''It's ridiculous,'' he said. ''This is really below the level of the country leading the world now.''

He offered perhaps the longest explanation to one of the most substantial points of contention with Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei, saying that Iraq has yet to prove that it has destroyed weapons or batches of anthrax or the nerve agent VX, and that it failed to document what happened to them in its 12,000-page declaration to the United Nations in December.

He said Iraq still hoped to hold ''technical discussions'' with the inspectors to settle these questions, which he claimed Mr. Powell had wildly distorted.
