

Poll Shows Europeans Conditionally Back U.S. on Iraq
By Christopher Marquis
Sept. 4, 2002

In a new poll, 6 out of 10 Europeans said they would favor an American-led invasion of Iraq if the United States first receives the support of allies and the United Nations.

The Europeans' conditional support for an attack against Iraq, which contrasts with the misgivings voiced by their political leaders, is one of a series of findings indicating that ordinary Europeans and Americans have a strikingly similar world view.

''Despite recent press reports of rising anti-Americanism in Europe and an impending trans-Atlantic split,'' the report with the poll said, ''at the public level, Europeans are in broad agreement when it comes to the war on terrorism, Iraq and a host of other international issues.''

The poll, which was conducted by the German Marshall Fund of the United States and the Chicago Council on Foreign Relations, recorded the views of a 6,001 Europeans, randomly selected and divided evenly among six countries: Britain, France, Germany, Poland, Italy and the Netherlands. The sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points. In the United States, Harris Interactive sampled 2,862 people by phone, with a similar margin of error.

Majorities of those who responded on both sides of the Atlantic to the polls, which were conducted in June and July, rated as an ''extremely important'' threat the possibility that Iraq will develop weapons of mass destruction, with 58 percent of Europeans and 86 percent of Americans expressing that view.

About 1 in 4 Europeans said the United States should not invade Iraq at all, compared with 1 in 10 who said the United States should attack even if it has to act alone.

The 60 percent of Europeans urging the United States to act in concert with other nations is close to the American response of 65 percent. The Dutch (70 percent) and the British (69 percent) were slightly more hawkish than the Germans (56 percent) and Poles (53 percent).

Despite the similarities, Europeans are more critical of President Bush's handling of Iraq, with only 21 percent of those polled giving the president a favorable rating, compared with 32 percent of Americans. The most critical were the French, with 81 percent rating the president's actions either ''fair or poor,'' followed by the British (77 percent) and the Germans (74 percent).

Slightly more than half of Europeans polled said American foreign policy is partly to blame for the Sept. 11 attacks, and 47 percent had a favorable view of the Bush administration's response.

Significantly, Europeans join Americans in placing international terrorism at the top of their list of threats to their nations' vital interests, though the Europeans (65 percent) tend to view the danger with less intensity than Americans (91 percent.)

On other issues, the Europeans polled were slightly more concerned than Americans about global warming (50 percent to 46 percent), but they were less worried than Americans about the spread of Islamic fundamentalism, (49 percent to 61 percent).

Europeans polled also were much less inclined than Americans to see China as an important threat (19 percent to 56 percent).
