

Iraq Is Said to Step Up Attacks on Allied Jets
By Thom Shanker
June 6, 2002

After a significant lull in Iraq's efforts to shoot down American and British warplanes patrolling two no-flight zones over its territory after Sept. 11, those efforts have increased again to worrisome levels in recent weeks, the British defense secretary, Geoff Hoon, said today.

''Immediately after September the 11th, there was quite a fall-off in the incidents over the no-fly zones,'' said Mr. Hoon, who spoke to reporters aboard Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's plane on the way to a NATO defense ministers' meeting here.

''Indeed, we judged that the regime in Iraq seemed to have got the message, that military action would follow if they were not very, very careful,'' Mr. Hoon said.

But he added that recently ''there has been an increase in the number of attacks on aircraft'' flown by British and American pilots over the northern and southern flight-denial zones set up a decade ago by the United Nations.

Mr. Hoon declined to say whether the attempts to shoot down allied warplanes were being matched by any other kind of war footing in Iraq, in particular in its program to acquire and field weapons of mass destruction.

''But clearly, they are feeling a little more confident than they have in the recent past, and that's obviously a concern for our people, for the very important job that they're doing,'' he said, referring to the British and American pilots.

After a day of talks in London, Mr. Rumsfeld and Mr. Hoon emphasized that no decisions had been made on military action to topple President Saddam Hussein. But Mr. Hoon said, ''We both believe that Iraq would be a much better place'' if Mr. Hussein were no longer ruling.

Mr. Hoon emphasized the importance of allowing United Nations weapons inspectors back into Iraq with the freedom to roam the nation.

''Unless and until we have U.N.-mandated inspectors on the ground, freely going where they want to in Iraq, we can only be deeply suspicious as to what is happening there,'' he said. ''We obviously have to take appropriate action to deal with that threat.''

Mr. Rumsfeld, however, has expressed skepticism about the ability of international arms monitors to puncture the disinformation, decoys and denials from Mr. Hussein.

Mr. Rumsfeld said today that ''the Saddam Hussein regime in Iraq has had a sizable appetite for weapons of mass destruction. Every month that goes by, their programs mature.'' That, he said, ''is not something that is a happy prospect for that region.''

Mr. Rumsfeld was in London and then Brussels today, opening a 10-day tour that will also take him to Estonia, for a meeting with Nordic and Baltic defense ministers, and to three Persian Gulf states before visits to India and Pakistan.
