
THREATS AND RESPONSES: CONGRESS; Powell Urges Strong Stand, Fast, for Move Against Iraq
By James Dao
Sept. 20, 2002

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell implored Congress today to pass swiftly the strongest Iraq resolution possible, arguing that anything less would undermine efforts to build international support for ousting Saddam Hussein.

''I've been known as a reluctant warrior; it doesn't bother me in the least,'' Secretary Powell told members of the House International Relations Committee. ''But the threat of war has to be there, and when a decision is made to fight a war, it's also well known that I believe strongly in doing it decisively.''

In his first Congressional testimony on Iraq, Secretary Powell showed little evidence of his past disagreements with more hawkish members of President Bush's cabinet, arguing that only through the imminent threat of war could the United States hope to force Iraq to destroy its weapons of mass destruction.

As the most committed internationalist among Mr. Bush's senior foreign policy advisers, Secretary Powell is influential among Democrats on Capitol Hill. Today, he made a strikingly personal appeal to those Democrats, asserting that his ability to win United Nations support for American policy would be weakened if Congress showed only tepid support for using force.

''I think it would be very unfortunate if it got a lukewarm response,'' he said of the resolution. ''It would undercut my efforts.''

The secretary also echoed the skepticism of Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld on weapons inspections, accusing Baghdad of already retreating from pledges to allow inspectors unconditional access.

Secretary Powell said the United States would oppose United Nations efforts to send inspectors into Iraq before passing a resolution that strengthened the inspectors' mandate and imposed tough new conditions. He warned that the first time Mr. Hussein thwarted the inspectors' work would be the last.

''We don't play games at palaces,'' Secretary Powell said. ''We don't stand around debating or arguing anything with them.''

The committee warmly received the secretary, and the chairman, Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, and the ranking Democrat, Representative Tom Lantos of California, promised quick action on a resolution and threw their support behind unilateral action.

Still, a number of Democrats and a few Republicans expressed concern that a pre-emptive attack on Iraq could fuel anti-American terrorism, undermine moderate Arab governments, encourage Iraq to launch missiles at Israel and possibly start a wider war in the Middle East.

''A lot of people are really still concerned about this, and their concern, I think, shouldn't be fluffed off,'' said Representative Ron Paul, a Republican from Texas. ''Some people even say: 'Who knows? This could end up in World War III.' ''

Secretary Powell responded by drawing an analogy to the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 that seemed to leave the door open, ever so slightly, to avoiding war in Iraq.

''President Kennedy didn't negotiate out of the Cuban missile crisis simply because he and Khrushchev got along well,'' the secretary said. ''Khrushchev didn't have the cards. And President Kennedy had the power and had made it clear that he was not going to tolerate this.''
