

THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; Split at U.N. Over Products That Iraqis May Import
By Julia Preston
Dec. 31, 2002

The Security Council, acceding to anxious pressure from the United States, voted today to revise a list of goods that must be approved by the United Nations before Iraq can import them.

In a sign of fissures in the unity the United States achieved in November with Resolution 1441, which obliged Iraq to cooperate with new weapons inspections, Russia and Syria abstained today. The other 13 Council members voted in favor.

The goods review list was first drawn up last May under what is called the oil-for-food program, in which the United Nations uses revenues from Iraqi petroleum sales to buy goods for the civilian population. Broad economic sanctions imposed by the Council on Iraq in 1990 after the invasion of Kuwait have severely eroded living conditions for most Iraqis.

The United States was determined to add its items to the list by Dec. 31 to bar Iraq from making new purchases of questionable goods in January, when administration officials expect the pace of their own preparations for a potential war with Iraq to quicken.

The United States also wanted to pass the measure before the composition of the Council changes at the turn of the year, when five new countries not familiar with the issue will become members.

Russia, a permanent Council nation, withheld its support because it had tried unsuccessfully to take one model of Russian-made heavy dump truck off the list so that Russia would be able to export it freely to Iraq, Russian diplomats said.

Earlier this year, the United States said it had satellite photos to show that Baghdad had converted some of the dump trucks to use as mobile rocket-launchers. Russian diplomats argued that Washington's pictures did not prove that Iraq had used trucks it bought from Russia and not years ago from the Soviet Union.

''The record we have is that there was no proof presented,'' the Russian ambassador, Sergei Lavrov, said today.

American and British diplomats made little secret of their frustration with Moscow, noting that France and China, the other permanent Council members, had supported the measure.

James B. Cunningham, the United States deputy representative, said pointedly that Russia had withheld support over a ''very narrow item.''

''It must be sad to go from superpower to truck seller,'' one senior Bush administration official said in exasperation.

Washington had little difficulty persuading the other Council members to accept most of its revisions to the list, many of which were items -- like rocket motor cases and full-motion flight simulators -- that Baghdad would be hard put to argue that it required to care for the needy.

In a compromise, the Council agreed to ask the United Nations to come up with standards to evaluate the quantities that Iraq would be allowed to import of medicines like Atropine and Pralidoxime, as well as Ciprofloxacin and several other antibiotics. Baghdad made requests for large quantities of the drugs, raising Washington's suspicions that it intended to use them as chemical and biological warfare antidotes for its military troops.
