

Mayor Puts Off London Trip Amid Concerns of an Iraq War
By Jennifer Steinhauer
March 11, 2003

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has indefinitely postponed a trip to London, citing concerns about a possible impending war, but some mayoral aides will go on the trip as planned.

Mr. Bloomberg recently announced that he would travel to London to meet with scores of business leaders next week, in an attempt to persuade British companies to relocate their headquarters to New York or to make major investments here. Mr. Bloomberg, who planned to fly one of his private planes to London, was also going to hold a dinner party at his townhouse in London to help entice business leaders.

Last week, when asked if a possible war with Iraq had cast doubt on his trip, Mr. Bloomberg seemed skeptical, if not dismissive. ''Oh, I don't know,'' he said during a news conference in the Bronx. ''It is a hypothetical thing. We can postpone the trip if there's anything going on. But I don't think they're going to ask me to conduct the war.''

Yesterday, however, Mr. Bloomberg's press secretary, Edward Skyler, released a statement citing ''the challenges our country is facing'' as the reason for postponing the trip. He added: ''The mayor knows President Bush will do everything in his power to avoid a war, but the president has to protect the people of this great city and country. The mayor doesn't know more than anyone else what course of action this will take, but all things considered, he does not feel this is the right time to make such a trip.''

However, Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff and Andrew M. Alper, the president of the city's Economic Development Corporation, will fly with some of their staff members to London on Monday for two days of meetings with executives from numerous British companies, including GlaxoSmithKline and BP, the oil company.

The two officials, who will pay their own way, may still use the mayor's London home for a dinner party, Mr. Skyler said. Mr. Doctoroff and Mr. Alper, who both hail from the private sector, believe in aggressively wooing companies and marketing New York City as a brand. (The city will pay for staff members' trips.)

Other travelers may take Mr. Bloomberg's lead. Eighty-two percent of 400 corporate travel managers recently surveyed by the Association of Corporate Travel Executives said they planned to reduce international travel if there were a war. And some airlines have announced temporary policies that would permit trans-Atlantic travelers to cancel and rebook later without paying the customary fee.

However, some travel agents said that non-business travelers had been sticking with their plans. ''We have not had any cancellations,'' said Kathy Sudeikis, the national vice president of the American Society of Travel Agents and a spokeswoman for All About Travel, an agency in Mission, Kan.

''What does he know that we don't know?'' she asked, referring to the mayor.

She added: ''The mayor may not want to be away from here, just as much as he is worried about being there. That may add another level of anxiety.''
