

Powell Says Next U.S. Step Involving Iraq To Come Soon
By James Dao
Sept. 4, 2002

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell acknowledged today that there are differences inside the Bush administration over how to eliminate Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, adding that President Bush would decide ''in the very near future'' what that action should be.

''Some are real, some are perceived, some are over hyped,'' he said of the disagreements, speaking to reporters on his plane traveling to South Africa for a summit meeting on sustainable development. ''The only position that really counts at the end of the day is the president's position.''

''And we are all working hard and we are all working in harmony to make sure the president has the best information and all the different insights that exist within his cabinet that could be brought to bear on this so that he could make the best decision.''

In his talk with reporters, Secretary Powell also said he had spent much of the past week consulting with leaders from allied countries about possible approaches to solving what he has called the ''Iraq problem,'' particularly sounding out their views on weapons inspections.

''I have been on the wires pretty constantly for the last week talking to all of our friends, making sure I understand their point of view, making sure they know where the president is,'' he said. ''It's not where some people say where the president is, or people who are not even in the government who claim to know where the president is. The president hasn't decided yet where he is. So I think we've been able to put it in perspective.''

More hawkish advisers like Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, and Vice President Dick Cheney argue that Mr. Hussein will soon possess nuclear weapons and must be removed from power quickly, whether or not the White House can muster international support for an attack. But Secretary Powell has quietly argued that the United States should build international support before attacking. As a first step toward building a coalition, Secretary Powell has called for returning weapons inspectors to Iraq -- a step favored by many European allies and one he expressed last weekend in an interview with the BBC.

Secretary Powell, in explaining his weekend remarks, said today that he had simply been repeating the president's policy. ''The president called for the return of inspectors, you will recall,'' the secretary said.

He also said that Mr. Cheney's case against inspections -- which he called ''powerful'' and ''vivid'' -- was not entirely different from his own position. They agree, he said, that the goal is to eliminate Iraq's nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs. The debate is over how.

''The issue is not the inspectors,'' he said. ''The issue is disarmament.''

''Inspections are one way of getting at that question,'' Secretary Powell continued. ''Whether it's the only way or there are other ways that have to be pursued to get at the question of disarmament is the debate that we're having within the entire international community.''
