

THREATS AND RESPONSES: OPPOSITION; Kennedy, in Sweeping Attack, Faults Bush on Iraq and Taxes
By David Firestone
Jan. 22, 2003

Senator Edward M. Kennedy accused the Bush administration today of rushing into war with Iraq at the expense of the struggle against terrorism and the domestic needs of the country.

''This is the wrong war at the wrong time,'' Mr. Kennedy said in a speech at the National Press Club encompassing virtually all of the Democratic critique of the administration's foreign and domestic agenda. ''The threat from Iraq is not imminent, and it will distract America from the two more immediate threats to our security: the clear and present danger of terrorism and the crisis with North Korea.''

Mr. Kennedy's broadside was one of the most forceful Democratic denunciations of the administration's conduct of foreign policy since Sept. 11. Mr. Kennedy, of Massachusetts, is more prominent and less constrained by political concerns than the Democratic presidential candidates, but he reflected what appears to be a growing willingness among Democrats to take on Mr. Bush's actions overseas and a confidence that Mr. Bush's economic policies lack widespread support.

Mr. Kennedy echoed the comments of the administration's European critics in demanding that United Nations weapons inspectors be given more time to conduct their search in Iraq, saying that the recent discovery of empty chemical warheads was a positive sign.

''If our goal is disarmament, we are likely to accomplish more by inspections than by war,'' he said. ''The international community accomplished greater disarmament during seven years of inspections than it did during the gulf war.''

He said the administration had been ''AWOL'' in letting a crisis build in North Korea and had overreacted by refusing to negotiate when that country restarted its nuclear program.

Mr. Kennedy focused on the tax-cut plan as an indication of misplaced priorities. The rich, he said, should be asked to sacrifice no less than the middle class and the poor.

''We cannot say it is wartime for the rest of America, but still peacetime for the rich,'' he said. --------------------

Apology From Rumsfeld

(By The New York Times), WASHINGTON, Jan. 21 -- Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld apologized today for remarks that some veterans' groups had criticized as disparaging draftees.

Earlier this month, Mr. Rumsfeld said he opposed calls to reinstate the draft, and suggested that the training and expense of conscripting troops had not been worth the trouble. Draftees, he said, ''were sucked into the intake, trained for a period of months and then went out, adding no value, no advantage really, to the United States armed services over any sustained period of time.''

Today, Mr. Rumsfeld said his remarks had been misunderstood. He had sought to underscore the importance, he said, of letting members of the all-volunteer forces have longer tours of duty to make full use of their training and experience.

''The last thing I would want to do would be to disparage the service of those draftees,'' he said. ''I always have had the highest respect for their service and I offer my full apology to any veteran who misinterpreted my remarks.''
