

THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSALS: CONGRESS; Address Reignites the Debate About a Military Move on Iraq
By Carl Hulse
Jan. 30, 2003

The State of the Union address by President Bush reignited Congressional debate over Iraq today, with two senior Senate Democrats moving to slow any use of American forces and Republicans arguing in support of military action.

More than 100 House members of both parties received a closed-door briefing from Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld. Some who attended said the secretaries forcefully laid out the argument for moving against Saddam Hussein, a presentation they expect to be made public next week.

''There was some new information for me,'' said Representative Tom DeLay, the Texas Republican who is majority leader, citing revelations about links between the terrorist network of Al Qaeda and Iraq, both in the past and recently.

Some Democrats who attended the briefing said it amounted to a rehash of White House assertions that the Iraqi government was an outlaw that had to be overthrown because it controlled weapons of mass destruction that posed a threat to the United States.

''There was nothing new of any significance,'' said Representative Jay Inslee, a Washington Democrat and member of a coalition of Democrats pressing the White House to let the United Nations arms inspection continue.

In the Senate, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts introduced a resolution calling on Mr. Bush to seek Congressional approval before beginning military action.

Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, proposed a separate resolution, calling for a vote in the United Nations Security Council before any attack. Some Democratic House members were planning similar initiatives.

''It is wrong for the administration to beat the drums of war,'' said Mr. Kennedy, who said President Bush had ''totally failed to make the case that Saddam Hussein is an imminent threat to our security.''

Mr. Byrd said, ''What concerns me greatly is that this president appears to place himself above the international mandates of the United Nations.''

Republicans and some Democrats rejected the call for a new vote, saying the authority granted to the president by Congress last fall was sufficient. The House and Senate voted in October to allow the president to use force to disarm Iraq should other pressures fail.

''Congress has spoken, and its message could not be clearer,'' Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said today. ''That debate is over.''

The Democratic leaders of Congress, Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota and Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, also expressed reservations about another vote. But Mr. Daschle said the administration needed to provide Congress with any evidence it was preparing for presentation to the U.N. next week.

''That ought to happen as quickly as possible,'' Mr. Daschle said.

He added he did not believe that the White House had as yet ''produced adequate concrete evidence'' to demonstrate that Iraq had the ability to share weapons of mass destruction.

Representative Cliff Stearns, a Florida Republican who attended the briefing, described the presentation as ''overwhelming.''

''The accumulation of information, I think, is the smoking gun,'' Mr. Stearns said.
