

A NATION AT WAR: THE AIR WAR; 40 Copters Act as Lures; Kill 55 Iraqis In Airstrikes
By Jim Dwyer
March 29, 2003

Speeding through a crystalline night sky, nearly 40 Apache helicopters from the Army's 101st Airborne Division attacked part of the Iraqi Republican Guard's Medina Division today. The attacks were centered around the Karbala Gap, a crucial route into Baghdad.

Three days after a foray by helicopters from another unit ended with battle damage to all the aircraft, the helicopters in tonight's attack often worked as a lure, drawing fire from the ground and establishing targets that were then struck by American and British air forces and by rocket-propelled artillery.

Maj. Gen. David H. Petraeus, the commander of the 101st Airborne, said 55 Iraqi soldiers were killed. In addition, 32 trucks, about a dozen pieces of antiaircraft systems, and 4 tanks were destroyed. Most of the damage was inflicted by the Apaches, he said. The Apaches sustained no damage from Iraqi fire, General Petraeus said. A principal goal of the battle, he said, was to combine the strength of the helicopters with that of the air forces and artillery.

''The Apache flies low and isn't traveling 600 miles per hour,'' General Petraeus said. He added that the approach used last night ''exploits the strength of both systems -- helicopters for target identification and close air support to attack from beyond the reach of the ground.''

While no helicopters were damaged by Iraqi fire, three ran into problems from other causes. One helicopter had problems during takeoff. A second, on its return, rolled over when landing, and debris from that helicopter smacked into one that was parked on the ground. The pilot of the helicopter that rolled over suffered a broken leg, the general said.

The helicopters took off from bases in central Iraq shortly after 8 p.m. Winds were light. The moon had not yet risen, and there was nothing but starlight to sharpen the silhouettes of each $20 million aircraft. That three helicopters encountered problems, none caused by the Iraqis, and on a perfect night, was another reminder of the difficulties of flying in desert terrain, General Petraeus said. The sandstorms earlier this week had dumped an inch of loose dust and dirt in the landing areas, and that scattered into the air with each takeoff and landing. In such circumstances, the last 10 to 20 feet of a helicopter's landing is regarded as a controlled crash.

The 101st managed to avoid the trouble encountered by the 11th Attack Helicopter Regiment on Monday. Iraqi paramilitaries thwarted that foray by firing small arms and rocket-propelled grenades into the sky, creating a wall of lead. The crew from one helicopter was captured by Iraqi forces, and at least 17 of the helicopters that returned to base were judged in need of repairs.

The Apache is one of the Army's most expensive weapons: it contains a radar system that quickly identifies targets and shares them with other Apaches in the area. Then a computer program begins shooting Hellfire missiles at those targets.
