

THREATS AND RESPONSES: ALLIES; Both Britain And Spain Dismiss Offer On Iraq Missiles
By Emma Daly
March 1, 2003

The prime ministers of Britain and Spain today dismissed Iraq's reported promise to destroy its Samoud 2 missiles as an attempt by Saddam Hussein to play ''games,'' saying that he was still not fulfilling demands to disarm and that the world must maintain the threat of a possible war to try and force compliance.

The two leaders also said they were confident of mustering sufficient support in the United Nations Security Council for a resolution presented last Monday by the United States, Britain and Spain that might authorize military action.

The British prime minister, Tony Blair, addressing members of his Labor Party, which is increasingly divided over the possibility of war in Iraq, spoke later today in unusually personal terms of the need to confront Mr. Hussein.

At a news conference with José María Aznar, the Spanish prime minister, Mr. Blair said the Iraqi missile offer was predictable. ''The moment I heard earlier in the week that Saddam Hussein was saying that he would not destroy the missiles was the moment that I knew later in the week that he would announce, just before Dr. Blix reported, that he would indeed destroy these missiles,'' he said, referring to Hans Blix, a chief weapons inspector. ''This is not a time for games.''

Mr. Aznar accused Iraq of playing ''a very cruel game.''

Neither leader answered directly when asked whether diplomacy had won over any of the waverers or opponents of their resolution on the 15-member Security Council. Only Bulgaria has so far indicated firmly that it would support the British-American-Spanish resolution.

The two leaders also refused to be drawn on whether, in light of fierce opposition to war in both their countries, they would support an American-led invasion of Iraq without another Council resolution.

''There's no point in speculating on that, because we're working flat out to get the broadest possible basis of consent,'' Mr. Blair said. ''I think that we will because what we're asking for is true to the United Nations resolution that was passed last November.'' He warned that ''the authority of the U.N. is on the line with respect to this.''

After returning to Britain tonight, Mr. Blair spoke to Labor Party activists and warned in strong terms of the combined threat of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.

''I know many of you find it hard to understand why I care so deeply about this,'' he said.

''I tell you: It is fear,'' he continued. ''Not the fear that Saddam is about to launch a strike on a British town or city tomorrow or the next day. Not a conventional fear about a conventional threat. But the fear that one day these new threats of weapons of mass destruction, rogue states and international terrorism combine to deliver a catastrophe to our world; and the shame then of knowing that I saw that threat, day after day, and I did nothing to stop it.''
