

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Iraqi Opposition Is Uneasy Over Delays and War Plans
By C. J. Chivers
Feb. 14, 2003

Plans for a meeting in northern Iraq of Iraqi groups opposed to Saddam Hussein have been disrupted again amid a new delay and signs of worry over American plans for war.

The groups say that their session will begin on Feb. 19 or 20, to allow more time for delegates to travel across the region's tense borders and reach the conference site, and to organize the event's security.

The conference was originally scheduled for mid-January and had already been postponed until Feb. 15, for similar reasons.

But the latest delay also exposed discomfort here with elements of American war plans.

In meetings last week in Ankara, Turkey, with American and Turkish officials, Kurdish groups were told that Turkish soldiers would enter Iraq on humanitarian missions during any war. Moreover, in testimony this week before Congress, senior officials from the Pentagon and State Department said the United States was considering a military occupation in Baghdad for as long as two years.

Both proposals face resistance here.

The Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the parties governing northern Iraq since 1991, want the United States to remove Mr. Hussein. But both bitterly oppose allowing Turkish soldiers into areas under their control.

There is also unease over the nature and extent of an American administration of Iraq.

Kurdish groups said they would welcome an American occupation, which they said would maintain order and allow the United States to remove weapons of mass destruction. Dr. Barham Salih, prime minister for the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, said an American presence could ultimately provide stability for the reconstruction of Iraq.

But he and Hoshyar Zebari, who handles foreign relations for the Kurdistan Democratic Party, also said a central concern for opposition leaders was how much participation they would be allowed during an occupation to choose and shape the government.

There were signs this week that the opposition, which has spent years fighting Mr. Hussein and calling attention to his abuses, worried that the United States might restrict their role. ''Has the Iraqi opposition any role to play or not?'' Mr. Zebari said.

In an effort to promote their agendas and refine their plans, the opposition groups want to hold what they regard as a symbolically important session in Salahuddin, a village not far from the Iraqi front lines.

Kanan Makiya, an adviser for the Iraqi National Congress, an organization of six groups, complained that the agencies in Washington were trying to thwart opposition plans and block the conference from going forward. ''The enemies of a democratic Iraq lie within the C.I.A. and the State Department,'' he said.

Despite the increasing tensions, an American official said this week that the State Department would send a delegation to any conference but wanted to ensure that the groups worked within a modest agenda and did not try to appoint a government in exile.

''We are not opposed to the idea of a conference,'' the official said.
