

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Council Toils Over Wording Of Resolution Aimed at Iraq
By Julia Preston
Oct. 9, 2002

The five permanent members of the Security Council negotiated hard today behind closed doors to forge compromises that might clear the way for the ''very different'' resolution on Iraqi disarmament that President Bush demanded on Monday.

The United States ambassador, John D. Negroponte, met with ambassadors of the four other nations with permanent seats on the Council -- Britain, France, Russia and China -- to seek common ground between Washington and Paris, which have offered competing proposals. Any one of the five nations could veto a proposed resolution, making a compromise all the more urgent.

France has insisted on two stages, involving a first resolution that would lay out tough new terms for United Nations weapons inspections in Iraq, and a second measure to authorize a military strike if the inspections fail. The United States and Britain drafted a resolution calling for military retaliation if President Saddam Hussein does not cooperate fully with arms inspections.

Mr. Negroponte steered the talks to focus solely on the American-British draft, diplomats said. They said the Americans seem to be under instructions from Washington not to discuss the two-resolution approach.

The United States is delaying formal introduction of its draft until both houses of Congress adopt a resolution giving President Bush power to go to war against Mr. Hussein.

In Washington, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said today that he saw progress on tightening the terms for weapons inspections, but continued wrangling over the green light for military action.

''The major issue to discuss is how to keep the threat of consequences tied as closely as one can to the new requirements that will be placed on Iraq,'' Secretary Powell said.

In a speech on Monday, Mr. Bush mentioned several ''tough immediate requirements'' he would demand in the Security Council: that the new resolution must allow the United Nations inspectors full access to Iraqi weapons sites and to interview Iraqi arms scientists outside their country, and that it must require Mr. Hussein to declare and destroy his weapons of mass destruction under United Nations supervision.

The United States has been more willing to give on other points, among them its proposal for the five nations to assign experts to the United Nations inspections teams. France opposed the idea, Council diplomats said. Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations biological and chemical weapons team, told Washington on Friday that he did not favor it, United Nations diplomats and administration officials said.

The idea was advocated by Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser. But Mr. Blix worried that such inspectors might give the impression that his work was controlled by the United States and Britain, the diplomats said. After he took over the inspection team in 2000, Mr. Blix reorganized it to eliminate experts assigned by governments. His core team of about 65 inspectors now consists only of full-time staff members working for the United Nations.
