

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; U.S. and France Agree to Keep Searching for Accord on Iraq
By Julia Preston
Oct. 10, 2002

President Bush and President Jacques Chirac of France, moving to avert a collision in the Security Council over Iraq, agreed today to keep negotiating to find a compromise for a tough resolution to force Baghdad to disarm, a spokeswoman for Mr. Chirac said.

In a telephone call initiated by Mr. Bush, the two said they would instruct their top diplomats ''to work to integrate the concerns'' of Paris and Washington to craft a resolution ''reconciling toughness and unity'' on the Council, according the spokeswoman, Catherine Colonna.

They spoke after difficult negotiations here on Tuesday between the five permanent, veto-bearing members of the Council, in which the United States and France seemed to dig in to their positions. Washington and Britain want a single resolution that would include authority for a military attack on Iraq, while France favors a two-stage approach that would postpone authorization of force to a second Council measure.

The sharp differences over Iraq between France, on one side, and the United States and Britain, all normally close allies, have raised the possibility of a damaging rift on the Security Council just as Washington is campaigning for support to confront Iraq over weapons of mass destruction. The other permanent members are Russia and China.

In the call, two days after Mr. Bush appealed to Americans to support military action to topple President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, Mr. Chirac said he hoped the negotiations would lead rapidly to a resolution with a ''strengthened and clear mandate'' for United Nations weapons inspectors, Mrs. Colonna said in Paris.

Mr. Chirac said the resolution should also include a ''reaffirmation of the competence of the Security Council to warn of consequences of any violation by Iraq of its commitments,'' carefully selected terms that could be the basis of a compromise in the dispute over force.

However, Mr. Chirac insisted, as he has throughout the monthlong debate, that he would not accept an automatic trigger for war in a first resolution. ''The military option should be the last choice,'' he said.

Late Tuesday, Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations weapons inspections team, and Mohamed ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, sent a letter to Iraqi officials setting down in writing the agreements they made last week in Vienna over the conditions for renewed inspections. The new Security Council resolution, if it passes, would add terms to make the inspections more aggressive, but most of the agreements from Vienna would continue to stand. The inspections chiefs asked Baghdad to confirm the arrangements.

Mr. Blix noted that Iraq had not agreed to allow immediate inspections of eight presidential compounds, but said he would conduct inspections in Mr. Hussein's palace sites ''with the same professionalism'' if Iraq were to change its mind. A draft resolution by the United States and Britain calls for full access to those sites.
