

Car Dealer Dodges Brickbats For 'S.U.V. for Saddam' Pitch
By Iver Peterson
Feb. 21, 2003

Brad Benson has learned this much, at least: there are people who can take a Saddam Hussein joke, and there are people who just don't get it.

This lesson came home to Mr. Benson after he ran a radio commercial last week for his Hyundai and Mitsubishi dealership. The gimmick: He offered Mr. Hussein a free car every year if he would leave Iraq forever.

''Maybe he'll pick the four-wheel-drive Outlander,'' Mr. Benson said in the commercial. ''A perfect choice for running away in the desert.''

Outlaw country-music singers and used-to-be movie stars may think there is no such thing as bad publicity, but car buyers have a lot of choices out there. Even a former offensive lineman for the New York Giants like Mr. Benson, 46, with a diamond Super Bowl XXI ring the size of a shift knob on his finger, was dismayed when his voice mailbox began to clog with angry messages.


''Downright stupid,'' one message said.

''If you ever think I would consider purchasing a car from someone who thinks that is funny, you are sadly mistaken,'' a woman called in to say.

''It's the most despicable way to advertise anything,'' another woman said in her long message, repeating ''despicable'' two more times.

''I called as many people as I can and I posted this on a Web site -- your car dealership should never remain in business,'' said a man who thought the ad was about Osama bin Laden.

Mr. Benson was wounded. ''I wasn't out to offend anyone,'' he said. ''I thought we would have some fun.'' But the radio station managers were calling to urge him to pull the ad, and Mr. Benson did the American thing: he apologized.

In a new ad broadcast over the weekend, stirring music played in the background while Mr. Benson spoke: ''A lot of people called and said they were offended by my ad, and for that I am truly sorry. I thought with all the doom and gloom in the media these days, we could use a little laugh.''

Then, he said, ''things got really weird.'' People started calling to complain about the complainers.

''Anybody who would want to make you apologize, they should go and live in that country,'' one woman said.

''I'd like to contribute the gas if Saddam Hussein takes you up on the offer,'' a woman named Kathy said. ''But let's be creative here; let's not give him a full tank.''

An Air Force reservist said, ''I found it funny.''

Members of a Marine unit waiting at Fort Dix for deployment to the Middle East called to say that they would stop by to pick up some Brad Benson Hyundai-Mitsubishi bumper stickers for their tanks.

Now Mr. Benson feels better.

''People understand that I didn't mean anything unkind,' he said. ''And the people who don't understand it, well, I think they really need to understand it.''
