

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE FUTURE; White House Approves a Plan To Administer a Postwar Iraq
By David E. Sanger
March 15, 2003

President Bush has approved a plan to create an ''Iraqi Interim Authority,'' made up of Iraqis from all of the country's major tribal, ethnic and religious groups, immediately after Saddam Hussein is deposed from power, senior administration officials said today.

Officials said the interim authority would receive what they called ''a rolling transfer of authority'' over daily Iraqi life. But one of the officials said the ''power ministries,'' meaning the military, intelligence apparatus and other institutions that support Mr. Hussein's rule, would be taken over by the American military, dismantled and then reformed and rebuilt.

The plans were described in rough form today by Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, in an interview with Al Jazeera television that was clearly intended to amplify the White House argument that it will liberate Iraq, not occupy it.

Ms. Rice said the group would be ''kind of like the Afghan Interim Authority, that would be a grouping of Iraqis who could exercise administrative and other authority on behalf of the Iraqi people and quickly as possible.''

The administration has gone to considerable lengths to compare a new government in Iraq to the one that has taken over in Afghanistan, and to discourage comparisons to the occupation of Japan beginning in 1945, in which Gen. Douglas MacArthur served as the country's supreme commander for years.

Still, the description given today by administration officials sounded much like an accelerated version of the Japanese model, with Gen. Tommy R. Franks acting as supreme commander but rapidly yielding responsibility to Iraqis, a United Nations representative and nongovernmental groups that would help provide food and rebuild schools.

The Treasury Department, somewhat belatedly in the eyes of many officials, is beginning to establish plans for a new currency for Iraq and thinking about how to rebuild a central bank and control the money supply.

Officials would not say today whether the dollar would temporarily become the country's de facto currency, saying there is some thought to using the ''Swiss print'' dinar, a currency used in the Kurdish area of northern Iraq that Mr. Hussein does not control, rather than the dinar, used in the rest of the country.

''Whatever it is, it will not be a currency that has Saddam Hussein's picture on it,'' a senior official said. ''We want to make the point that this is not going to be Saddamism without Saddam. You have to visibly kill some institutions.''

The announcement today of the interim authority, which would eventually oversee local and then national elections, is part of a broader American effort to convince Iraqis that they should aid in the effort to overthrow Mr. Hussein.

Administration officials concede that Mr. Bush has signed off on broad concepts, not operational principles, for a new government.

''It all depends,'' an official said, ''on how we are received when we get there.''
