

4 Accused of Illegally Sending Money to Iraq
By Thomas J. Lueck
Feb. 27, 2003

Federal authorities charged four men yesterday with illegally funneling at least $4 million to Iraq through a charity in Syracuse.

Those named in a 14-count indictment include an oncologist, an imam at a state prison and the director of the charity -- which operates under the name Help the Needy -- the authorities said.

''Those who covertly seek to channel money into Iraq under the guise of charitable work will be caught and prosecuted,'' Attorney General John Ashcroft said in a prepared statement. ''As President Bush leads an international coalition to end Saddam Hussein's tyranny and support for terror,'' he said, ''the Justice Department will see that individuals within our borders cannot undermine these efforts.''

The indictments included no charges of terrorism, and federal officials said they did not know where the money ended up in Iraq or its intended use. Nonetheless, they said, any money transfers to Iraq without federal approval violate sanctions in place since 1990.


A lawyer for the oncologist said yesterday that his client had worked enthusiastically with the Syracuse charity ''out of humanitarian concerns that are shared by millions of other Americans.''

''He does not believe he did anything wrong or unpatriotic,'' said the lawyer, Edward Z. Menkin, who is representing Dr. Rafil Dhafir, 55. Dr. Dhafir, who practices in Rome, N.Y., is identified on several Web sites as the founder of Help the Needy. He is a United States citizen who was born in Iraq.

The others named in the indictment are Maher Zagha, 34, a Jordanian citizen living in Amman who attended college in Utica and Syracuse; Ayman Jarwan, 33, a Jordanian working in the Syracuse area as executive director of Help the Needy; and Osameh al-Wahaidy, 41, an imam at the prison, the Auburn Correctional Facility, who also teaches math at the State University College at Oswego.

Help the Needy and a related organization, Help the Needy Endowment Inc., were also named as defendants. Phone messages left at the charities' offices in Syracuse yesterday were not returned.

The charges include conspiracy to violate federal sanctions against Iraq under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act. Dr. Dhafir and Mr. Zagha were also charged with money-laundering.

The three defendants living in the United States were arrested yesterday morning, federal officials said.

According to the indictment, Dr. Dhafir and the other defendants set up Help the Needy without obtaining a license required to provide humanitarian aid to Iraq.

Prosecutors said the charity solicited donations through false or misleading statements.

Some of the money it raised was deposited in accounts held by the charity at Oneida Savings Bank and Key Bank, then transferred to a personal account under the name of Mr. Zagha, the indictment said.

Money was transferred out of the country to the Jordan Islamic Bank in Amman, the indictment said, adding that the money was transferred to individuals in Iraq.
