

A NATION AT WAR: ANKARA; No Promises From Turkey About Staying Out of Iraq
By Frank Bruni
March 26, 2003

American officials today implored Turkish leaders here to keep their troops out of northern Iraq, but the talks ended without any assurance from Turkey that its troops would stay away.

The issue has been a point of keen contention between Turkey and the United States, longtime allies whose ties have been severely strained by the American-led war in Iraq. American officials worry that the arrival of Turkish troops could set off violent clashes with Iraqi Kurds.

For the second day in a row, Zalmay Khalilzad, the special American envoy to the Iraqi opposition, met with Turkish officials here to try to settle the issue. Mr. Khalilzad did not report any progress.

''We will continue our discussions,'' he said. ''This is a difficult and complicated issue.''

As he and other American officials continued to exert pressure on Turkey, President Bush announced a supplemental war budget that included a $1 billion aid package for Turkey. That amount was much less than the $6 billion or more that American officials initially offered in return for a degree of military cooperation that Turkey did not ultimately provide.

But it suggested a desire by American officials not to end up at greater odds with a friendly country that shares a border with Iraq and that could threaten the stability of northern Iraq by sending troops there.

Asked about the motive behind the aid package, Ari Fleischer, the White House press secretary, told reporters in Washington that the United States recognized the strides Turkey had made in stabilizing its economy.

Mr. Fleischer also acknowledged the potential economic consequences of the war on Turkey. Turkish officials say that after the Persian Gulf war in 1991, Turkey lost tens of billions of dollars in diminished tourism and trade. That war also sent refugees streaming into Turkey, and Turkish officials now say they would order troops into northern Iraq, where Turkey has maintained a small military presence for years, to prevent that from happening again.

Turkish officials also express concern about Kurdish terrorists crossing with refugees into Turkey. Political analysts say Turkey has yet another, perhaps greater worry.

''They fear that there will be a Kurdish semi-independent state which might pose a danger in the future,'' said Can Paker of the Turkish Economic and Social Studies Foundation, referring to what analysts believe could happen in northern Iraq after the war.

Over the last week, there have been conflicting reports about whether Turkish troops entered Iraq after the war began, and there has been growing international opposition to any military incursions by Turkey.

On Sunday, Mr. Bush warned Turkey away. On Monday, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain did the same. In addition, European Union officials have suggested publicly that Turkey would jeopardize its long-frustrated bid to join the union if it sent troops into northern Iraq.
