

TRACES OF TERROR: LEGAL ACTION; Suit by Victims' Kin Says Iraq Knew of 9/11 Plans
By Tina Kelley
Sept. 5, 2002

Families of some victims of the Sept. 11 attacks filed a class action lawsuit yesterday against Iraq and others, charging that Iraqi government officials knew about plans for the attacks and conspired with Al Qaeda to seek revenge for Iraq's defeat in the Persian Gulf war.

The suit, filed in United States District Court in Manhattan, seeks more than a trillion dollars in damages for the wrongful death of 300 Americans and injuries to 1,100. The victims include people who were in the World Trade Center or the Pentagon; on the hijacked planes that crashed into them or into a field in Shanksville, Pa.; and rescuers.

The suit, brought by the firm Kreindler & Kreindler, names as defendants Iraq, the Iraqi intelligence agency, Saddam Hussein and his sons, Al Qaeda Islamic Army, Osama bin Laden, the estates of the hijackers, the Taliban and organizations that provided money for the attacks.

James P. Kreindler, one of the lawyers representing the plaintiffs, said the complaint traces close contacts between Mr. bin Laden and his associates and Mr. Hussein, his children and top-ranking Iraqi intelligence officials over a 10-year period.

Iraq ran Salman Pak, a training camp in Baghdad that had a fuselage of a Boeing 707 to train Qaeda terrorists in hijacking commercial aircraft, according to court papers.

The suit alleges that Naeem Abd Muhalhal, an Iraqi news columnist, reported in July 2001 that Mr. bin Laden was making plans to ''demolish the Pentagon after he destroys the White House.'' Mr. Muhalhal has been linked to Iraqi intelligence since the 1980's, the suit alleges.

Mr. Kreindler said Qaeda terrorists hijacked a Saudi jumbo jet in 2000 and flew it to Iraq a few days after the destroyer Cole was attacked in Aden, Yemen. No one was hurt in the hijacking.

''This is a seething network of murderers who have penetrated Iraq and Middle Eastern countries,'' Mr. Kreindler said, ''and it couldn't have happened without the approval of Saddam Hussein.''
