

Rumsfeld Denounces Iraq for Rejecting Further Arms Inspections
By Thom Shanker
Aug. 14, 2002

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld today dismissed an official Iraqi statement that weapons inspectors had completed their work, and said Baghdad's comments were ''a broken record'' of repeated acceptances followed by repeated rejections of United Nations monitors.

''They agreed to have inspectors,'' Mr. Rumseld said. ''They threw the inspectors out. The inspectors are still out, now for a period of years. And they're still not allowed back in. What else can one say? They're in violation of the U.N. resolutions.''

The Iraqi information minister, Muhammad Said al-Sahaf, accused President Bush on Monday of lying about the country's weapons programs to stoke support for war against President Saddam Hussein.

Mr. Sahaf indicated that international arms inspectors would not be allowed to return. ''They claim something remains,'' he said. ''This talk can be responded to and disproved. Inspections have finished in Iraq.''

At a Pentagon news briefing, Mr. Rumsfeld repeated his doubts that Mr. Hussein would ever allow an inspection program so thorough that it would lead to the destruction of all of Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear weapons.

''It is a big country,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''They've had years to do what they want to do. They have done a great deal of underground tunneling. They have things that are mobile. It makes it very difficult for inspectors under the best of circumstances to find things.''

Iraqi leaders, he said, ''haven't agreed to any inspectors on any basis, let alone on a basis that would be sufficiently intrusive that reasonable people could expect to learn what they might need to learn.''

The Pentagon also said today that it planned to hire two transport ships to haul weapons to the region, although officials said the cargo was not part of a shadow deployment ahead of an offensive to topple President Hussein.

Pentagon officials said one shipment of military vehicles was for a planned exercise in the area and another was a routine rotation of hardware positioned in allied Persian Gulf states after the 1991 war with Iraq.

Even so, military officials said the process of hiring private sealift companies as contractors was not being conducted on the usual public Web sites, but via e-mail with a large number of cargo companies.

Those officials said it would be incorrect to connect the shipments to any planning for war with Iraq. But they said the unusual method of requesting bids from contractors reflected heightened security concerns since the Sept. 11 attacks and because of public debate about whether to move against Mr. Hussein.

Officials said one ship would haul Humvees and infantry fighting vehicles to the region to join other military equipment already stored there, and another ship would carry similar vehicles, as well as helicopters and ammunition, for a future military exercise.

The Pentagon declined to identify either destination.
