

2 Yugoslav Aides Are Fired for Sales of Fighter-Jet Parts to Iraq
By Daniel Simpson
Oct. 24, 2002

Yugoslavia has fired a senior military official and the director of the state trading company Yugoimport as a result of NATO's accusations that a Bosnian Serb company exported military hardware to Iraq via Belgrade.

Officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Yugoslavia and the United States have released few firm details about the case, which appears to be focus on the violation of the United Nations arms embargo rather than the military significance of any sales.

After searching the offices of Orao, a state-owned company in the semiautonomous Serbian republic within Bosnia, NATO peacekeeping troops said on Tuesday that they had found proof of ongoing exports to Baghdad.

The American Embassy in Bosnia accused Orao last month of selling spare parts and services to Iraq for its Soviet-era MIG-21 warplanes, continuing a longstanding trade that began when Bosnia was a republic in a larger, socialist Yugoslavia.

But the company, which in the 1980's was part of a Yugoslav industry that armed Iraq against Iran (as did companies in the United States, Britain and France), does not appear to have heeded the warning.

When NATO soldiers raided the Orao factory, they found a document dated Sept. 25 telling five staff members to remain in Iraq and remove all traces of the company's involvement there, diplomats in Bosnia said.

Military analysts said that even if the spare parts kept aging Iraqi aircraft in good condition, they would hardly help Saddam Hussein's military defend against the high-technology weapons that the United States could deploy.

One Western diplomat said the only significant question was whether assistance from Orao was decisive in helping Iraq to put antiquated planes in the sky at all.

''Given that Saddam has had 10 years of sanctions, how does he keep his old equipment going?'' the diplomat asked. ''If Orao is sending in spare parts, they would be very useful in keeping his decrepit air force flying.''

But the United States has not specified whether this is part of its accusation.

''The U.S. expects the relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Yugoslavia, to undertake the necessary steps to immediately halt any ongoing cooperation with Iraq, to conduct a thorough investigation and to hold accountable those responsible,'' said the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher.

Yugoslavia's response was immediate, as it hopes next month to be admitted as a junior partner in NATO, the first step for aspiring members of the alliance.

After a special meeting this evening, the government dismissed Ivan Djokic, a deputy defense minister, and Jovan Cekovic, the head of Yugoimport, declaring them ultimately responsible for the shipments.

''Regardless of how significant this case is,'' a Yugoslav government official said, ''we have to demonstrate our complete rejection of any cooperation with Iraq at this time. We need American support so we have to act decisively.''
