

THREATS AND RESPONSES: EUROPE; France and Germany Agree on Iraq
By John Tagliabue
Oct. 3, 2002

As Congress moved to accept a resolution giving President Bush latitude to strike Iraq if he concluded that United Nations diplomacy was stalled, the leaders of France and Germany said they opposed any effort to alter the conditions under which United Nations inspectors operate.

Briefing reporters this evening after a dinner at the Élysée Palace that included discussion of Iraq, President Jacques Chirac said that he and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany remained ''totally hostile'' to any United Nations resolution that would ''immediately give an automatic character to military intervention.''

''The positions of France and Germany are the same,'' he said.

The Bush administration has been irked by insistence in Paris that the Security Council approve two resolutions, one that would demand of Iraq compliance with United Nations inspectors, and a second spelling out the consequences, including strikes, if Baghdad failed to meet the demands.

The position of Mr. Chirac and Mr. Schröder came on the eve of a Security Council briefing in New York by the chief United Nations inspector, Hans Blix, on the agreement reached in Vienna this week with Iraq. Asked whether France could approve of the return of the inspectors by force, Mr. Chirac replied that the responsibility belonged to Mr. Blix.

''We expect a response from him tomorrow,'' he said. ''We have full confidence in him.''

After talks with Mr. Blix and other United Nations officials in Vienna, Iraq agreed on Tuesday to let arms inspectors back into Iraq under existing United Nations agreements.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell rejected the resumption of inspections before a new Security Council resolution is in place.

Addressing German resistance to any involvement in military action against Iraq, Mr. Chirac said he could ''naturally understand'' the German view.

''Our approach is the same,'' Mr. Chirac said. ''We all want that Iraq be stripped of arms of mass destruction, and that this can be verified by inspectors, without conditions.''

Mr. Schröder, who was having his first meeting with Mr. Chirac since his narrow victory in German elections on Sept. 22, said he was ''touched'' by Mr. Chirac's understanding for the German refusal of military involvement. He added: ''We respect the French position. Our positions are close.'' He said he remained committed to keeping Germany out of military action.

''Our position has not changed since the election,'' he said.

Berlin's opposition to war has tangled German ties to Washington, and last week Mr. Schröder flew to London apparently to ask Prime Minister Tony Blair to help mend the rift with Washington.

The Bush administration also angered over a campaign remark reportedly made by the German justice minister Herta Däubler-Gmelin, that compared Mr. Bush's tactics to those of Hitler.

Asked tonight whether he intended to apologize to Mr. Bush, Mr. Schröder replied evasively, ''I don't understand the question.''
