

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NORTHERN IRAQ; Kurds Take Up Positions Along the Turkish Border
By David Rohde
March 12, 2003

Hundreds of Kurdish soldiers armed with artillery, rocket launchers and heavy machine guns are continuing to take up positions along Iraq's border with Turkey, according to Kurdish officials and local residents. Turkey moved a large military convoy of its own to the border area late last week.

The United States has been trying to broker an agreement to prevent open clashes between the two bitter rivals that could complicate an American-led attack on Iraq. Turkey has said it reserves the right to move its forces into northern Iraq to prevent Kurds from declaring an independent state. Kurds, whose forces would probably be quickly overwhelmed, say Turkey is simply trying to occupy their territory.

''They are not in yet and we won't let them come in,'' said Haji Sallah, 31, a Kurdish fighter who said Kurdish soldiers continued to move into the border area today. ''We have everything to fight them, and we will use everything.''

On Sunday night, a column of Turkish forces moved toward the border with Iraq, according to Turkish journalists. Kurdish officials said today that the column had neared a complex of customs and administrative buildings on the Turkish side of the border, and that it stopped and camped there.

Hundreds of Kurdish soldiers backed by artillery and other heavy weapons continued to take up positions on the border today, according to residents and officials. Kurdish officials said the buildup began last Friday and involved only soldiers from around the city of Dohuk. They said they did not know how many troops were involved.

''This is absolutely a precautionary measure and defensive,'' said Hoshyar Zebari, a leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party. ''The intention is not to provoke any crisis.''

Turkish officials could not be reached to comment. They have said their forces might enter northern Iraq to distribute relief supplies and prevent refuges from flooding into Turkey, as they did after the first Persian Gulf war. Turkey, which crushed a separatist insurgency by its Kurdish minority in the 1990's, fears that an independent Kurdistan in northern Iraq would fuel a new secessionist drive.

Kurdish leaders in northern Iraq say they want to become part of a democratic, federal Iraq. They say they refuse to give up the freedom and autonomy they have enjoyed in northern Iraq under an American- and British-enforced no-flight zone.

American officials have been trying to broker a deal between the two sides, but the date of a planned meeting in Turkey has not been set, Kurdish officials said. Kurdish officials and residents have said they would accept Turkish troops if they enter Iraq as part of an American-led coalition and leave when American forces do. But if the Turks come on their own, the Kurds say, they will meet popular resistance.
