

THREATS AND RESPONSES: COMMERCE; Iraq Awards Oil Contract To Company From Russia
By Sabrina Tavernise
Jan. 18, 2003

Iraq tried to mend relations with Russia yesterday by awarding a new oil contract to a Russian company and promising several more in what analysts called a last-ditch effort to gain allies as the Bush administration prepares for military action there.

Hussin al-Hadithi, an under secretary at the Iraqi Oil Ministry, signed the contract yesterday in Baghdad with the Russian company Stroitransgaz for an oil field in western Iraq. The Iraqi government also set aside two other small fields for Russian companies, and began talks on a third. Russian officials, including Ivan Matlashov, the first deputy energy minister, attended the signing.

The contracts appeared to be a peace offering by Iraq, which angered Russian officials last month by scrapping a giant oil contract with the Russian oil firm Lukoil. The cancellation amounted to a snubbing of Russia, one of the few countries that has publicly supported Iraq.

But the contracts signed yesterday were small and awarded to relatively obscure Russian companies, and analysts said they would not be influential among Russian foreign policy makers.

In addition, Lukoil's contract, by far the largest of any Russian company in Iraq, did not appear to have been reinstated during the talks. Lukoil said in a statement yesterday that it had revived the contract, but Mr. Hadithi said Iraq not yet chosen a company to develop the field. Reuters quoted Mr. Matlashov as saying, ''the door is still open for Lukoil.''

''Iraq is trying to recover maybe a little bit of what they lost with Russia last month,'' said Paul Collison, energy analyst at Brunswick UBS Warburg, an investment bank in Moscow.

Russian officials have insisted on guarantees that their business contracts in Iraq not be repudiated after any American-led war against President Saddam Hussein. But the Bush administration contends it cannot give guarantees, and dismisses Russian claims of exclusivity.

As the United States steps up preparations for military action, Russia has tried to play a dual role, maintaining relations and laying claim to new business with Iraq, while at the same time backing international calls for increased scrutiny of Mr. Hussein's weapons programs.

''This stuff is games,'' Mr. Collison said, referring to the contracts signed yesterday. ''I don't think people are taking it very seriously.''

In private, Russian companies refer to a kind of contractual musical chairs, grabbing whatever is available now on the off chance they will be allowed to keep it later. Even Lukoil's contract has never been counted as an asset in the company's balance sheet because economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations in 1991 bar its development.

''Why would you fight for a license from a regime that appears all but set for a collapse,'' said Stephen Dashevsky, senior oil analyst at the Russian investment bank Aton. ''How much is that license worth?''
