

U.N. Plans Soon to Streamline Application of Iraq Sanctions
By Serge Schmemann
May 9, 2002

In what is seen as a diplomatic victory for the United States and Britain, the United Nations Security Council is expected to approve today new procedures for sanctions against Iraq that should ease Iraqi imports of nonmilitary goods like food and medicine.

American and British diplomats have worked hard to streamline the procedures, in the hope that the move would deny President Saddam Hussein the claim that the sanctions were causing civilian suffering.

A resolution approved by all five veto-wielding members of the Council -- the United States, China, Britain, France and Russia -- was presented to the full Council on Monday. The sanctions are due for renewal every six months; the new arrangement is to go into effect June 1.

Iraq has been under United Nations sanctions since it invaded Kuwait in August 1990. In December 1996, an ''oil for food'' arrangement was made allowing Iraq to export oil to buy civilian goods.

Many imports, however, became tied up in the cumbersome review process to block imports that could be used for military purposes. Washington said this enabled President Hussein not only to argue that the program was punishing all Iraqis, but also to exploit loopholes to buy many military goods.

Under the current structure, most contracts are approved by a monitoring committee, and any Council member can place a contract on hold. Washington has held up $5.3 billion worth of contracts for years.

Under the new procedures, military items continue to be banned. The central innovation is a ''goods review list'' of items that have dual military and civilian use, like high-powered computers. All goods not on the list will now be allowed into Iraq after a quick check. Those on the list will be screened by two United Nations agencies in charge of dismantling Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. The procedures require a ruling within 30 days.

''It will be absolutely clear now that we have simplified this system, that the international community is not blocking civilian goods,'' said Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman.

The new arrangement was supposed to have provided for far stricter controls on smuggling goods in and out of Iraq. But these were opposed by Jordan, Syria and Turkey, neighbors of Iraq that have benefited from illicit trade.

Iraq has opposed any change other than an end to the sanctions. ''The British and Americans say this will make it easier for Iraq,'' said the Iraqi ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammed Aldouri. ''The opposite is true. They will be able to hold up contracts as they wish.''

Iraqi officials have held talks recently with Secretary General Kofi Annan, raising hopes that arms inspectors might be allowed back into Iraq. The inspectors were expelled in December 1998.
