

THREATS AND RESPONSES: OIL FOR FOOD; U.S. Wants List of Allowed Imports to Iraq to Be Tightened
By Julia Preston
Dec. 12, 2002

The Bush administration, convinced that Iraq has been using gaps in United Nations monitoring to import goods to use in war, wants a list of restricted material to be revised by the end of next week, a United States official said today.

Last week, the Council voted unanimously last week to set a deadline of Jan. 4 for any revisions.

John R. Bolton, the under secretary of state for arms control and international security, met with representatives of the 14 other countries on the Security Council on Tuesday to press the administration's case for the changes. But the Council is preoccupied with the huge declaration of its weapons programs that Baghdad presented last weekend, and is reluctant to move at Washington's pace, several Council diplomats said in a meeting here today.

A copy of the roster of 38 changes the Bush administration wants made indicates that it is trying to block Iraq from obtaining any new equipment that it might use for its military. United Nations weapons inspections are under way in Iraq that will determine whether the United States will lead a military campaign to disarm the country.

Washington wants to amend what is called the goods review list, which specifies which items must be examined by United Nations monitors before they can be imported into Iraq. The list is part of the oil-for-food program set up to ease the privations suffered by ordinary Iraqis under economic sanctions imposed on Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait in 1990. The United Nations uses revenues from sales of Iraqi petroleum primarily to buy food, medicine and other goods for civilians.

According to its roster, the administration is seeking to add to the United Nations list a range of communications equipment, including jammers to block satellite-positioning systems, ultra-wide-band radios and broadcast equipment.

The administration is seeking to tighten import restrictions on missile components and to add several medicines to the list that could serve as antidotes to chemical weapons agents, including atropine, pralidoxime and sodium nitrite. Washington is also proposing to add medical equipment that can be used to purify toxins and certain viral pathogens, which it suspects Iraq is seeking for biological warfare.

The administration's goal is to get United Nations weapons inspectors, who are responsible for reviewing the list of goods that Iraq requests for import, to check more closely the amounts Iraq is seeking of certain items and to ask more questions about Baghdad's final purposes, the American official said.

United States officials also receive copies of Iraq's requests under the program, and have developed the amendments based on specific items Baghdad has asked for since the goods review list was approved earlier this year.
