

THREATS AND RESPONSES: BAGHDAD; Iraqi Aide Threatens Suicide Attacks Across Region if U.S. Invades
By Ian Fisher
Feb. 2, 2003

A senior Iraqi official is threatening that Iraq will carry out suicide attacks against Americans in this country and the region if the United States carries through with its threats to strike Iraq.

''Martyrs, perpetrators of suicide attacks, are our new weapons, and they will not only take action in Iraq,'' Taha Yassin Ramadan, a vice president who is considered one of the nation's top two officials after Saddam Hussein, is quoted as saying in the new issue of the German magazine Der Spiegel. ''The whole region will be set ablaze. This part of the world will become a sea of resistance and danger for Americans.''

President Hussein also repeated warnings that American soldiers would be killed before being able to enter Baghdad, the capital.

In recent days, Iraqi officials have sent out signals of both defiance and accommodation. Iraq has said it wants to show greater cooperation with the United Nations inspectors here. This week, they invited the two top inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, back to Iraq before they report again to the Security Council on Feb. 14.

Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz said today that the chief inspectors would come to Baghdad on Feb. 8. But a spokesman for Mr. Blix said he was not aware of any Iraqi response to a letter Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei sent late Friday saying they would go only if they got the assurances they were seeking on Iraqi cooperation.

The spokesman in Vienna for Dr. ElBaradei, Mark Gwozdecky, said that the arms chiefs were ready to go on Feb. 8 but that ''our clear expectation is that the disarmament issues will be resolved before the visit.''

The chief inspectors are demanding that Iraq grant permission for flights by a United Nations-marked U-2 photographic reconnaissance airplane. They also seek guarantees that they will be able to conduct private interviews with Iraqi weapons experts and want Iraq begin to put into effect important disarmament legislation.

The Iraqis' comments came amid heightened talk of war both here and in Washington, with President Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain warning on Friday that time was running out for Iraq to give up the illegal weapons they say it has.

For the last two weeks, Mr. Hussein has appeared regularly on state television in a display of the nation's preparations for war. On Friday night, he discussed with military officials the way he expected American soldiers to carry out any invasion: by landing in the desert and moving to take the capital.

''When the enemy lands, he ensures air protection,'' he said. ''And when you attack to destroy him, he will destroy you with his air forces.''
