

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; Annan Tells Iraq It Must Allow Unfettered Weapons Inspections
By Julia Preston
Sept. 19, 2002

Secretary General Kofi Annan told Iraq today that he expected ''full and unconditional cooperation'' with United Nations weapons inspectors when they return to the country, as American officials charged that Iraq was seeking to limit the sites that inspectors could examine.

In a meeting this evening with the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, Mr. Annan made clear that he has no doubts about the skills of Hans Blix, the Swedish weapons expert who heads the inspection team based here. Iraqi officials have dismissed Mr. Blix as a ''spy.''

As the United Nations prepared for renewed inspections, American diplomats worked to regain the initiative for a Security Council resolution threatening military action to force Baghdad to rid itself of any weapons of mass destruction.

Bush administration officials said they understood that Iraqi officials told Mr. Blix in a meeting here on Tuesday that some sites would be off limits. Mr. Blix is to report on the meeting to the full Security Council on Thursday. ''We expect Blix to share with the Council his frustration that the Iraqis were not able to offer up unfettered access,'' one administration official said.

American officials sought to build a case in the Council that Iraq was already trying to subvert the inspections. They hoped to convince doubting Council nations that the inspections would not work to make Iraq abandon its weapons programs.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell made phone calls over the past two days to his counterparts in France, Russia and Britain as well as to Mr. Annan in an attempt to mend rifts that emerged Tuesday over the Iraqi offer to renew the inspections, suspended since 1998.

The United States and Britain began crafting the language of a tough draft resolution, and the British ambassador, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, scheduled a meeting Friday with the 10 nonpermanent Council members to discuss it. The text would require the inspections to lead to Iraqi disarmament and authorize a military attack if Iraq does not comply.

Although France, a permanent veto-bearing Council member, appeared to shift toward the United States today, saying it would consider a new resolution, Syria and Mauritius, nonpermanent members, said they thought the inspectors' return was enough to ensure that Iraq was getting rid of its weapons.

Germany's chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, said in an interview to be published on Thursday in a German daily, General-Anzeiger, that the world should work to subvert the government of Saddam Hussein ''from within,'' without a military assault. The American ambassador to Germany, Daniel R.Coats, told a business audience in Frankfurt that the dispute over Iraq ''makes the job more difficult'' of the alliance between Germany and the United States, Reuters reported.
