

EYES ON IRAQ: UNITED NATIONS; Annan Weighs Reply to Iraq On Invitation To Inspectors
By Barbara Crossette
Aug. 3, 2002

Secretary General Kofi Annan yesterday welcomed an offer by Iraq to begin talks in Baghdad on United Nations arms inspections, but indicated that President Saddam Hussein was still far from complying with Security Council requirements for lifting sanctions against Iraq.

Bush administration officials and American diplomats at the United Nations reacted with skepticism to Iraq's offer, coming at a time when reports of possible military action against Iraq by the United States are becoming more detailed and frequent.

Since 1991, when the sanctions imposed on Iraq after its 1990 invasion of Kuwait were linked to its getting rid of all weapons of mass destruction, the Iraqis have feigned progress toward compliance, apparently to stall punishment or to divide the Security Council.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, traveling in Asia, said ''we've seen this game before'' from the Iraqis. He added that ''inspections aren't the issue, disarmament is.''

Hans Blix, the executive chairman of the inspection team, the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission, known as Unmovic, drafted a reply to the Iraqis yesterday.

He was responding to a letter sent to Mr. Annan on Thursday from the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, asking Dr. Blix and his experts to Baghdad for talks as soon as they were ready to come. This was the first time Iraq had agreed to a visit by inspectors since they left in 1998.

The contents of Dr. Blix's letter were not made public. But Mr. Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard, said at a briefing yesterday that Iraq's proposal, which would replace active inspections with long-term monitoring, ''was at variance with the one laid down by the Security Council in its Resolution 1284'' at the end of 1999. That resolution created a new inspection commission for Iraq, after Mr. Hussein accused the old commission of being an American spy operation and refused to deal with it.

Dr. Blix has held to the resolution's demand that his inspectors go to Iraq for 60 days to re-evaluate the situation after four years without inspections. Only then would the team decide what Iraq must still do to fulfill its disarmament requirements. The Security Council would be the final arbiter of Iraq's compliance.

Iraq is asking for a ''comprehensive assessment'' up front, presumably at the proposed meeting in Baghdad.

This is not the first time Iraq has used this tactic to try to close the books on disarmament inspections. There have been several reviews characterized as ''comprehensive'' in the past, and all of them concluded that the Iraqis still had major questions to answer, especially about their biological and chemical weapons and missile programs.

The Security Council is scheduled to meet with Mr. Annan on Monday.
