

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AT THE U.N.; U.S. and France Closer to Deal on Terms for Iraq
By Julia Preston
Oct. 19, 2002

With fragments of diplomatic text bouncing back and forth between Washington and Paris and other world capitals, the United States and France moved closer to agreement today on a draft resolution to force Iraq to disarm, Security Council diplomats said.

For the first time in weeks, something that seemed like progress was made late Thursday when France responded favorably to a compromise proposal from Washington that would open the way for the Council to hold a second round of debate if United Nations weapons inspectors report that Baghdad is cheating or blocking their attempts to uncover weapons of mass destruction.

But today French officials were weighing another element in Washington's offer, which dealt with the warning to Iraq of ''serious consequences'' if it took new actions to deepen its ''material breach'' of Security Council resolutions.

The United States modified earlier language that would have given Washington a clear authorization in one resolution to go to war against President Saddam Hussein. But Washington is still insisting on phrases that could provide a legal basis for American military action if other veto-bearing Council members, after seeing the results of weapons inspections in Iraq, still do not agree that it is warranted.

Secretary General Kofi Annan, speaking to reporters today in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, echoed the new optimism here. ''I think, at the end of the day, the Council will act, will take an optimal decision,'' he said.

President Jacques Chirac of France, who was in Beirut today for a meeting of French-speaking nations, said the negotiations were ''progressing in the right direction.''

He said, ''There's no opposition between the French thesis and the American thesis,'' adding that France was only seeking to reaffirm its interpretation of international law.

There was no meeting of the five permanent, veto-bearing members of the Council here today, as those nations -- the United States, Britain, France, Russia and China -- waited for Mr. Chirac to return to Paris and decide on his response to an offer that Washington called its last.

Diplomats said they expected the next meeting would not come before Monday. But they were still hoping the United States and Britain would present their draft formally in the Council early next week and it would be adopted by the end of the week.

After Arab nations accused the United States of war-mongering in two days of debate in the Council this week, the head of the Arab League, Amr Moussa, unexpectedly praised Washington's compromise proposal in Beirut today.

''There is a chance to avoid automatic military action, and to make the Security Council the judge of the report of the inspectors,'' Mr. Moussa said, calling this ''progress.''
