
Annan Plans Talks With Iraq on Inspections Plan
By Barbara Crossette
Feb. 26, 2002

See the article in its original context from February 26, 2002, Section A, Page 8Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
Secretary General Kofi Annan has agreed to meet the Iraqi foreign minister for talks next week, the first such meeting in more than a year. The talks with Foreign Minister Naji Sabri on March 7 will precede an Arab League ministers' meeting, Stephane Dujarric, a United Nations spokesman said today.

Iraq faces not only threats of attack from the Bush administration as it expands its war on terrorism, but also diplomatic pressures from other Security Council members who want some sign that Iraq is cooperating toward the resumption of arms inspections in the country ahead of a May deadline for reviewing the stalemated ''oil for food'' program.

Iraq has defied Security Council resolutions, rejected a new inspection plan deemed more favorable to its interests and, since 1998, refused to admit any inspectors except for routine monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency.

The government of Saddam Hussein, saying it has fully disarmed and deserves to have sanctions lifted, has tried in the past to circumvent the Security Council and deal directly with Mr. Annan, although the secretary general has no power to change relations between the United Nations and Iraq.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
''The secretary general expects to have a focused discussion on the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, including the return of U.N. weapons inspectors to Iraq,'' Mr. Dujarric said of the talks.

But Mr. Annan is known to be distressed by developments across the Middle East, and he said today in London after a meeting with Prime Minister Tony Blair that ''any attack on Iraq at this stage would be unwise.''

Last Thursday, the secretary general told the Council that the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians threatened to become a full-fledged war. ''Truly, we are nearing the edge of the abyss,'' he said.

Mr. Annan went to Iraq in 1998 and signed a cooperation agreement with Mr. Hussein, which the Iraqis quickly violated. He has since resisted being drawn directly into anything that would look like negotiations with the Iraqi government.

Mr. Annan last met with an Iraqi foreign minister, then Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf, in February 2001. Earlier this month, Amr Moussa, secretary general of the Arab League, said the Iraqis were ready to talk without conditions, but he did not say whether this included discussing the resumption of arms inspections.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
A second meeting with Mr. Annan could take place in April, after an Arab League summit meeting, Mr. Dujarric said today.

The return of arms inspectors for chemical, biological and missile programs -- who now work for a relatively new organization, the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission -- is the primary demand of the United States.
