

A NATION AT WAR: PALESTINIAN MILITANTS; Hamas Urges Iraqis to Make Suicide Attacks on the Invaders
By James Bennet
March 22, 2003

As Muslim preachers in the Gaza Strip inveighed today against war in Iraq as a war on Islam, leaders of the Palestinian group Hamas urged Iraqis to use suicide as a weapon against invading troops.

''As long as there is an American aggression against a Muslim country, Iraqis must defend themselves, using all means,'' Dr. Abdel Aziz Rantisi, a Hamas leader, said in a telephone interview from Gaza City. He said the Iraqis should conduct ''martyrdom operations, using explosive belts against the American and British soldiers.''

Although a few thousand protesters marched against the war through Gaza City today, it was another relatively quiet day in Israel and the occupied territories.

Surfers in gleaming wet suits bobbed on their boards and scanned the horizon to the west for waves. Many Israelis, including schoolchildren, complied with government instructions and carried gas masks in cardboard boxes dangling from straps over their shoulders. But others did not bother.

Maj. Gen. Amos Gilad, who is called the ''national explainer'' for his assigned role as the government spokesman during the war, urged Israelis to go about their daily routines but in a heightened state of alertness.

''This might seem to be a contradiction but it isn't,'' he told Israel radio. ''On the one hand, we have breathing space to continue our routine, and this is correct. On the other hand, we must continue to be alert in regard to this wicked man,'' a reference to Saddam Hussein.

Although other Israeli officials said the threat was receding here by the day, General Gilad warned that Mr. Hussein might still lash out at Israel if his back is to the wall.

Last month the spiritual leader of Hamas, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, released a letter saying that in response to a war on Iraq, ''Muslims should threaten Western interests and strike them everywhere.''

Today, protesters marched through several West Bank cities as well. In Jerusalem, the police used tear gas to break up a demonstration by perhaps 200 people.

In the West Bank, Palestinians mourned the death of a man they believed to be the first Arab to die in the war, Ahmed Muhammad al-Baz, the Baghdad-born son of a couple from the West Bank. Mr. Baz, a 33-year-old driver who ferried passengers between Amman, Jordan, and Baghdad, had pulled into a gas station when he was killed by a missile during the first strike on the Iraqi capital, his family said.

Mr. Baz's father was from Nablus and his mother was from Jenin, where the family received mourners today. Mr. Baz's wife and two children had gone to Amman before the war began, his family said.
