

Carter, in Oslo for Prize, Says U.S. Should Work With U.N. on Iraq
By Frank Bruni
Dec. 10, 2002

Former President Jimmy Carter said today that the United States should work with the United Nations toward a peaceful resolution of tensions with Iraq, expressing a belief that such an outcome was possible.

Speaking at a news conference here on the day before his formal acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize, Mr. Carter largely avoided any overt questioning of current United States policy toward Iraq.

Mr. Carter said that the weapons inspections under way in Iraq were important, and that the involvement of the United Nations in that effort was prudent and just.

''What I interpret as the official decisions of our government,'' he said, ''are completely compatible, at least at this point, with what I have proposed for the last three or four months.''


But Mr. Carter also offered an appraisal of those inspections that differed from some of the pessimistic ones that the Bush administration had given in recent days.

''I think at this point, in my opinion, Iraq has complied,'' Mr. Carter said, adding that he did not have access to all of the information the Bush administration might have.

He also said that if the United Nations Security Council ultimately judged Iraq to be in compliance, ''I see no reason for armed conflict.''

Mr. Carter's selection as the winner of this year's peace prize came against the backdrop of the American conflict with Iraq. When the selection was announced in October, Gunnar Berge, the prize committee chairman, said the decision should be seen as a rebuke of President Bush's threats of an American military strike.

Mr. Carter has said repeatedly that the United States should not defy the United Nations, and he reiterated that opinion today.

But as he sat, smiling widely, at the Norwegian Nobel Institute, he seemed less interested in stirring controversy than in savoring the honor bestowed on him.

Mr. Carter's presidency, from 1977 to 1981, was a troubled one, and he lost his effort to win a second term in a landslide defeat to Ronald Reagan.

But he said today that the prize would help shift attention toward ''the more favorable things'' in his administration's record, including the Camp David accord in 1978 between Israel and Egypt, which was cited by the prize committee.

He also defended the United States when a French journalist said many Europeans believed that American policy toward Iraq was driven by oil.

''Anyone who claims that the United States is trying to get cheap oil -- free oil -- by invading Iraq is foolish,'' Mr. Carter said. ''I know my country. I know my people. And I can assure you that is not the policy of my government.''
