

A NATION AT WAR: THE PRISONERS; House Resolution Warns Iraq On Treatment of U.S. Captives
By Carl Hulse
March 28, 2003

The House, many of whose members have expressed outrage at the treatment of American troops held captive in Iraq, demanded in a unanimous resolution today that the Iraqi government observe international rules on prisoners of war.

The resolution was one of several war-related measures considered today in Congress. Among others, tax breaks to members of the armed services and their families were approved on a vote of 97 to 0 in the Senate, which also unanimously passed a resolution of gratitude to nations that are partners of the United States in its action against Iraq.

The only disputed measure tied to the war was a House resolution asking President Bush to issue a proclamation ''designating a day of humility, prayer and fasting for all people of the United States.''

The resolution, which also asks Mr. Bush to call on all Americans ''to seek guidance from God to achieve a greater understanding of our own failings,'' was adopted by 346 to 49, with 23 members voting present.

''I feel that this kind of resolution, which brings in a religious tone to this war in Iraq, is inappropriate,'' said Representative Jan Schakowsky, Democrat of Illinois, who voted against it.

The unanimous House vote on the P.O.W. issue came after many members had viewed a videotape of Iraqis celebrating the death of some American soldiers and interrogating others.

''This resolution will send a clear message of resolve that this Congress will stand by and insist on the rights of its military sons and daughters in their time of peril,'' said Representative Doug Bereuter, Republican of Nebraska.

Leaders of the House Armed Services Committee said this week that they had asked the Pentagon to identify the Iraqi commanders in areas where American prisoners are being held. The resolution said Congress supported the president in warning Iraqis that they could be subjected to trial as war criminals if they mistreated prisoners.

Among the provisions of the tax legislation adopted by the Senate are those allowing reservists and members of the National Guard to deduct travel expenses related to their service even if they do not itemize deductions; exempting from taxes the full $6,000 benefit paid to families of troops killed in action; and excluding from capital gains taxes the profits of a home sale by members of the military, who frequently move so often that they would not otherwise qualify for the exclusion.

''They risk their lives,'' said the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa. ''They shouldn't have to risk their finances, too.''

The House has passed similar legislation, which must now be reconciled with the Senate's.
