

STATE OF THE UNION: THE NATIONAL MOOD -- REPUBLICANS; The Case Is Made Against Iraq
By Michael Janofsky
Jan. 29, 2003

To gauge response to President Bush's State of the Union address last night, The New York Times spoke to Americans who may be affected by the plans he laid out.

If there had been any doubts in the Vukich family about the need for the United States to wage war against Iraq -- and there were a few -- President Bush dispelled them tonight.

''It's sad, it's a sad thing to have to go to war,'' Tiffany Vukich, 17, a high school senior, said after she and her parents, Robert and Laurie, both 42 and both Republicans, watched the State of the Union address on the family's big-screen television. ''But now, I think it's the right thing.''

Before Mr. Bush spoke, Tiffany and Mrs. Vukvich, a hair stylist and a makeup artist for television programs and movies made in Utah, said they had not been so sure about the correctness of going to war. They said they did not follow world events as closely as Mr Vukich, president of a startup telephone company, and were waiting to be convinced.

Mr. Vukich said he was not looking for much more convincing, having grown certain that the United States and other countries had just about run the course of diplomacy to encourage Mr. Hussein to eliminate any weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems.

But as Mr. Bush ended, Mr. Vukich said the speech made him feel more sure than ever that the president was leading the country, and the world, in the right direction. His wife and daughter agreed.

''I definitely think we're going to war,'' Mr. Vukich said. ''I can't imagine now how you could think it's not the right choice. I believe him when he said we have an obligation to helping the people of Iraq and making a difference in the worlds.

''But it's like the president said. If Saddam Hussein is not evil, there is no definition for it. He really is a crazy, terrible man. If more saber rattling could scare this guy out of the saddle, obviously that's the direction we should go. But I feel like Saddam Hussein is a liar and cannot be trusted. If he can get nuclear weapons, I have no doubt he would not wait for permission to use them.''

Mrs. Vukich said of the president, ''I felt he was very convincing. Our hands are tied. I don't want us to go to war. I don't like the idea of war. But we're not dealing with a normal situation. He persuaded me of that. MICHAEL JANOFSKY
