

THREATS AND RESPONSES: U.N. TEAM; With No Assurances of Progress, Chief Inspectors Will Visit Iraq
By Julia Preston
Feb. 4, 2003

The chief United Nations weapons inspectors will visit Baghdad for two days of meetings starting Feb. 8 even though they have received no assurances that Iraq will resolve several disputed issues before they go.

''There are no guarantees,'' Hans Blix, the chief biological and chemical weapons inspector, said here today. ''We have simply indicated the issues which should be easy'' to resolve, he said.

''We assume because we haven't heard from them that they are willing to accept'' terms that the chief inspectors laid down in a letter sent Friday to Baghdad, said Ewen Buchanan, Mr. Blix's spokesman.

After receiving an invitation to return to Iraq last Thursday, Mr. Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, the chief nuclear inspector, responded with a letter demanding immediate progress on three issues. They called on Iraqi officials to ensure that they could conduct interviews with Iraqi weapons experts in private either inside or outside the country, and to give permission for flights by an aerial U-2 reconnaissance plane the inspectors want to deploy.

They also insisted that Iraq take steps to adopt a legal ban on all weapons of mass destruction. Baghdad has resisted this step since it was first ordered in a 1991 Security Council resolution.

Iraq has not replied to the chief inspectors' letter. Confusion arose over the weekend as to whether the inspections chiefs would make the trip without Baghdad's written guarantee that there would be progress.

Both President Bush and British Prime Minister Tony Blair made clear they thought the trip was a ploy by Baghdad to string out the inspections. Mr. Bush said it would be inappropriate for the arms chiefs to ''negotiate'' with Iraqi officials.

But Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei said they were willing to give Iraq another chance to clarify a long list of unanswered questions about its past illegal weapons programs.

Baroness Emma Nicholson, a member of Britain's House of Lords, said here today that she had given Mr. Blix new evidence she said she had obtained in Iraq from Iraqis whose names she had promised not to divulge. She said her information included locations of two sites where citizens said Iraq was hiding illegal weapons and a recent ''order form'' for some ''tubing,'' which she said appeared suspicious.

Mr. Blix said his team had not yet had time to examine the information.

Diplomats confirmed that the Iraqi ambassador, Mohammed A. Aldouri, had requested permission to speak Wednesday to the Security Council, where Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is expected to present previously classified evidence of Iraq's weapons programs and possible ties to terrorists.
