

U.N. Talks on Iraq Inspections Resume With Sides Far Apart
By Serge Schmemann
May 2, 2002

Officials of Iraq and the United Nations began a second round of talks today on resuming international arms inspections in Iraq, but few diplomats believed that they would resolve the three-year stalemate over the issue.

The talks opened in the morning with a meeting of Secretary General Kofi Annan and the Iraqi foreign minister, Naji Sabri, and continued in the afternoon with teams of experts. The meetings were scheduled to continue through Friday.

Both sides have made clear that their intentions in the talks are different. Mr. Annan, supported by Washington, has insisted that the meetings should focus largely on getting arms inspectors back into Iraq. The inspectors were originally sent to Iraq after the 1991 Persian Gulf war, but the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, barred them from the country in 1998.

Mr. Hussein, for his part, has tried to focus the talks on lifting the economic sanctions imposed on Iraq by the United Nations Security Council since Baghdad invaded Kuwait in 1990. A new system of sanctions is expected to come into effect on June 1, under which most restrictions would be lifted on civilian imports, while controls would be tightened against items on military-related materials included in a ''goods review list.''

''I would hope that we would spend a considerable amount of time on the return of inspectors,'' Mr. Annan said. ''I know that the Council members are hoping that the talks will lead to the return of the inspectors and that talks will be successful.''

Mr. Sabri said he hoped that the discussions would include the lifting of sanctions, the American threats against Mr. Hussein, and the American-British enforcement of no-flight zones in northern and southern Iraq.

The Bush administration, which has placed a high priority on eliminating Mr. Hussein, said it did not hold high expectations for the United Nations meetings.

''We're not holding our breath to hear the Iraqis say finally that they actually do accept to implement these obligations fully,'' the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, said in Washington.

Iraq initially proposed in February to open a dialogue with Mr. Annan ''without preconditions.'' The proposal came the week after President Bush proclaimed Iraq a partner in an ''axis of evil'' with North Korea and Iran, and Baghdad's offer was widely perceived as an effort to build international resistance to a possible American attack.

The first meeting was held in early March. A second one originally scheduled for April was delayed after Mr. Hussein said he did not want to take attention away from the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
