

THREATS AND RESPONSES: UNITED NATIONS; 2nd Iraq Letter Stops Short of Reconfirming Pacts
By Julia Preston
Oct. 13, 2002

Iraq sent a second, more conciliatory letter to the chief United Nations weapons inspectors yesterday, but once again stopped short of fully reconfirming agreements the two sides made earlier in the week.

Amir Hammudi Al-Saadi, an adviser to Saddam Hussein, sent the new communication after several members of the Security Council, especially the United States, sharply criticized the first letter, dated Thursday. The critics said that letter undercut progress made in the talks last week in Vienna between Iraqi officials and the weapons inspectors.

''I hope you did not interpret my letter as an objection,'' Mr. Al-Saadi wrote to Hans Blix, the head of the United Nations weapons inspections team, and Mohamed ElBaradei, the director of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is in charge of nuclear inspections.

Mr. Saadi said his first text had been ''an explanation of our understanding for what we had agreed'' as to the conditions governing the inspectors' work in the country, according to an unofficial translation.

Mr. Saadi expressed Iraq's ''complete readiness'' to receive an advance team of inspectors on Oct. 19, as well as its readiness ''to resolve all issues that may block the road to our joint cooperation.''

In a letter sent on Oct. 8, Mr. Blix and Mr. El Baradei laid out the conclusions they understood the two sides reached in Vienna and asked only for confirmation. Iraq's second letter, dated yesterday, still does not provide the categorical confirmation that Mr. Blix sought. It tries to draw him into further negotiations on several practical points.

The new Iraqi letter created confusion today between the United Nations and Vienna, where the atomic agency is situated, as diplomats in both places sought to interpret Mr. Saadi's opaque statements.

''I think they were saying, 'Oops! We shot ourselves in the foot the first time,' '' said one Security Council diplomat in New York. ''They tried to do better. But conciliatory is not good enough. What this letter does not do is just say yes.''

The United States and Britain are seeking a resolution from the Security Council to make the inspections far more aggressive and to authorize a military attack if Mr. Hussein does not cooperate. An open debate on the measure in the Security Council is scheduled to begin on Wednesday.

In Baghdad, Iraq's Parliament met in an emergency session yesterday, but did not respond to the resolution adopted Thursday by the Congress giving President Bush authority to go to war against Iraq. Instead, Iraqi legislators condemned a recent measure by Congress that recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.
