

THE SKY WAS FALLING; Baghdad, 2003
By Patrick Graham
March 30, 2003

The air-raid sirens were followed 10 minutes later by antiaircraft batteries firing and by the strikes. By evening the second round of bombing came, and we had everything ready. We had the BBC on the shortwave. My friend Thorne, a photographer, had gotten the generator working. We had taped the windows with X's and filled the tub with water. With only one flak jacket and one helmet among three of us -- me, Thorne and his girlfriend, Kael -- we had decided that it would be used by anybody going out on the balcony. But as soon as the sirens sounded we all ran out and ducked down. Below, taxis peeled out of the parking lot and men ran across the street into the Sheraton. A lone white dog loped down the road along the river. When the antiaircraft started, he ran back the other way. Car alarms started sounding.

We saw the missiles hit across the river. There was an orange explosion that seemed to come from inside out followed by a mass of dark gray smoke that hung above for a while before drifting down the Tigris. The antiaircraft ack-ack-ack is surprisingly loud, a low booming thud and then fireworks crackling in the sky, as silver flashes of the exploding flak glitter and then fall away. Occasionally, red-orange tracers streaked upward. But the lights of the city were bright, giving it a yellow glow, so everything seemed to return to normal as soon as the firing stopped. After half an hour, you could smell the burning plastic from the fire. We were expecting shock and awe, but that would not come for another day. These strikes seemed to fade and then disappear.

We decided to go for a drive, crawling down Abu Nuwas Street, along the river. You could see the fire burning in the building across the water. The police and army were standing in small groups, as if they didn't want to be alone. A few men were out walking, and a man and woman were standing on a street corner joking with some soldiers. After a little while, we went back to our rooms at the Palestine Hotel, and Thorne and Kael fell asleep. Outside it was clear, and the three-quarter moon lit the river. I put my spare mattress up against the windows and tried to go to sleep.

