
THREATS AND RESPONSES: GUERRILLA WAR; Islamic Militants Clash With Kurdish Forces in Northern Iraq
By C. J. Chivers
Dec. 5, 2002

Renewed fighting broke out today between Kurdish forces and Islamic guerrillas in the mountains along the Iran-Iraq border when a surprise attack by the guerrillas, reported to have links to Al Qaeda, briefly overran Kurdish positions, Kurdish officials said.

Casualty reports varied during the day, but late tonight the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, whose forces have been battling the guerrillas in the area, said 42 Kurdish combatants had been killed. An earlier estimate said only six of the Kurdish fighters, known as pesh merga, had been wounded.

''They were advancing against us, and they attacked posts in two different locations and overran the posts,'' said Nizar Said, a spokesman for Barham Salih, the prime minister of the Patriotic Union's government in the eastern part of the Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq, an area out of the control of the central government in Baghdad. By afternoon, Mr. Said added, the Kurds pushed the guerrillas back to their original location.

The casualty reports could not be independently confirmed. It is also unclear whether the guerrillas, members of a militant group known as Ansar al-Islam, or Supporters of Islam, suffered casualties or simply withdrew when counterattacked. The Associated Press reported a pesh merga officer saying he believed that 10 Ansar militants had been killed.

The fighting occurred in the hills near the village of Khurmal, where the ridges rise to the Iranian border.

The area is part of a sliver of the Kurdish autonomous zone controlled by the Ansar militants, who have enforced a severe brand of Islamic order in the villages, imposing codes of behavior similar to those once required by the Taliban in Afghanistan.

Kurdish officials say that this is not a coincidence, that Ansar al-Islam has connections to Al Qaeda and that its ranks include Arab fighters who trained in Afghanistan and fled here as the Taliban were routed last year.

Faraidoon Abdulkader, the Patriotic Union's interior minister, estimated that the group had about 650 gunmen and said they had spent months digging trenches and caves along the Iranian border. He said the group's weaponry ranged from small arms to heavy 120-millimeter mortars, and that its ammunition caches were surprisingly large.

The Kurds and the Islamists have been intermittently exchanging small-arms and mortar fire, and sometimes ambushing each other's forces. Ansar al-Islam nearly assassinated Mr. Salih in the spring, when three men sprayed his entourage with gunfire. Five of the prime minister's guards and two militants were killed in that exchange.
