

Experts Put Large Price Tag on Rebuilding of Iraq
By James Dao
Aug. 2, 2002

A panel of experts on Iraq told a Senate committee today that there are no obvious successors to Saddam Hussein and that the Bush administration should be prepared to help install and protect a pro-American government if it decides to topple him -- a proposition, they added, that would be long and expensive.

On the second day of congressional hearings on the Bush administration's plan to oust the current leadership of Iraq, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee heard from nongovernmental experts and former senior government officials on policies for rebuilding Iraq once Mr. Hussein is removed from power.

Nearly all the experts argued that setting up a stable, pro-Western government in Baghdad would require a huge infusion of aid and a long-term commitment of American troops to maintain peace.

''If the U.S. is going to take the responsibility for removing the current leadership, it should assume that it cannot get the results it wants on the cheap,'' said Phebe Marr, a retired professor from the National Defense University who has written extensively on Iraq.

Scott Feil, a retired Army colonel who studies postwar reconstruction programs, presented a detailed analysis showing that the United States would need to deploy 75,000 troops after Mr. Hussein is deposed to help stabilize the nation.

Those forces -- which he said should include two Army divisions, Special Forces soldiers and an engineering brigade -- would be needed to patrol major cities, guard the Iranian border, and secure oil fields and weapons facilities.

Colonel Feil estimated that the force would cost more than $16 billion a year and would be needed for at least 12 months. At least 5,000 American troops would probably be needed for at least five more years to maintain stability, he added.

''What you're testifying about is a lot of people, a lot of money, and quite a bit of risk,'' said Senator Richard G. Lugar, an Indiana Republican. ''We can only do so much.''

Of the six experts who testified today, only one, Caspar W. Weinberger, the secretary of defense under President Ronald Reagan, argued that the United States need not play a major role in rebuilding Iraq.

Dr. Marr said she would not expect the nation to fragment with Mr. Hussein's fall. But she said that finding a strong, pro-Western replacement for Mr. Hussein would be difficult.

The best alternative, she argued, would be for the United States and its allies to occupy Iraq to help nurture a new, more democratic ruling class.
