

THREATS AND RESPONSES: INTERVIEW; U.N. Inspectors Query Scientist, Who Denies Tie To Iraqi Arms
By Neil MacFarquhar
Dec. 28, 2002

United Nations nuclear weapons inspectors have interviewed an Iraqi scientist they said was involved in what was possibly an early stage of a clandestine nuclear program, but Iraq played down the significance of the interview today.

The scientist involved, Kathim Jamil, called in to a live program on Shabab Television, the station owned by President Saddam Hussein's son Uday, to dispel the idea that he knew anything about the nuclear program.

''I have nothing to do with any programs,'' he said on the show. ''I'm a metallurgist working on restoring aluminum tubes.''

The scientist also provided a glimpse of how the negotiations over the interview were conducted. He declined to show up at the Canal Hotel, the headquarters of the United Nations team, insisting instead on neutral ground.

Ultimately inspectors talked to him for an hour at Al Rashid Hotel. Mr. Jamil said he was upset with the interview because of its emphasis on naming scientists who had done research with him.

''I'm a minerals specialist and have no relation with the previous program,'' he said, referring to the nuclear arms program that Iraq has said it abandoned.

Mr. Jamil works at Al Raya Company, a research center, where he specializes in adapting aluminum tubes in the production of 81-millimeter missiles, according to a statement by Iraqi officials.

An Iraqi official from the National Monitoring Directorate, the office that serves as a liaison to the inspectors, attended the meeting, the statement said.

Both Washington and London have suggested recently that Iraq sought to acquire aluminum tubes to process uranium, rejecting the idea that they could be used for ballistic weapons. But Iraq has said the tubes had been around since the 1980's as part of their small-arms development.

Hiro Ueki, the spokesman for the inspectors, issued a statement mentioning the interview but avoiding naming the scientist. ''He provided technical details of a military program,'' the statement said. ''This program has attracted considerable attention as a possible prelude to a clandestine nuclear program.''

The Security Council resolution authorizing the inspections allows Iraqi scientists to be interviewed outside the country, where presumably they would feel freer to speak. But United Nations officials have said they would be reluctant to engage in what would essentially be assisting a defection.

Gen. Hussam Amin, chief of the monitoring directorate, said several times this week that scientists who wanted to go would not be punished, although Iraqis dismiss the idea that any scientist would be interested in doing so.
