

THREATS AND RESPONSES: NEGOTIATIONS; Saudi Prince Encourages Exile Agreement for Hussein's Departure
By Christopher Marquis
Jan. 30, 2003

Convinced that the United States is moving toward war, the Saudi foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, has hastily set up a meeting with President Bush for Thursday to discuss the prospects of persuading President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to go into exile, a diplomat familiar with the preparations said today.

The Saudi minister, who met this week in Paris with President Jacques Chirac of France and with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, asked the White House to arrange a meeting with Mr. Bush within hours of his State of the Union address, which Saudi officials viewed as a prelude to military action, the diplomat said.

Prince Saud is expected to consult with Mr. Bush, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and others in search of a way to offer Mr. Hussein exile or safe haven outside Iraq.

The prince has been vague about his proposal in public remarks.

''We all hope for a possibility of a solution that avoids the dismemberment and maintains the territorial integrity of Iraq,'' he told reporters in Paris. But the officials familiar with the Saudi proposal say that it will probably involve a United Nations resolution that will offer amnesty to Mr. Hussein and to a score of his closest aides, provided that they agree to leave Iraq.

No such offer has yet been extended to Mr. Hussein, and even advocates of the idea consider it a long shot. Still, senior Bush officials have signaled their willingness to consider some lenience for Mr. Hussein in order to avoid a war.

This month, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld said he ''personally, would recommend that some provision be made so that the senior leadership in that country and their families could be provided haven in some other country.''

Under different circumstances, Mr. Powell said he would ''certainly consider'' a plan to grant amnesty to Iraqi generals who rose up against Mr. Hussein.

The Saudi proposal, as it now stands, would request a grace period after a possible second Security Council resolution to authorize force against Iraq.

Diplomats would use that pause before military action to negotiate Mr. Hussein's departure.

''We have to make it clear to him that if you give up power, we'll leave you alone, and you can sail off into the sunset,'' one diplomat familiar with the proposal said.

''Or,'' the diplomat added, ''we have to make it clear to his generals, if you get rid of Saddam, you can sail off into the sunset.''
