

U.S. Says Iraq Moved Missiles To No-Fly Zone
By James Dao
April 23, 2002

See the article in its original context from April 23, 2002, Section A, Page 13Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
The Iraqi military late last week moved surface-to-air missiles into southern and northern ''no-flight zones'' patrolled by American and British pilots, putting those pilots at significantly higher risk, senior Pentagon officials said today.

The movement of the missiles has been part of heightened activity by Iraqi air defenses inside the two zones, where Iraqi military aircraft are prohibited from flying.

But Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, played down the significance of the moves, saying that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq frequently moves missiles, radar and other anti-aircraft systems in and out of the no-flight zones. Indeed, a Pentagon official said the missiles may have already been moved out.

''The only reason I mentioned it today was just to highlight this issue of having Americans being shot at as they're patrolling the no-fly zone,'' General Myers said.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
The incident comes at a time of increased tension between Iraq and the United States.

General Myers said American and British pilots have either been fired on or have been the targets of Iraqi radar systems at least four times in the past two weeks. On Friday, allied jets dropped precision-guided weapons on a radar installation in the northern zone, the first such attack since February. Pentagon officials said the radar appeared to be linked to Russian-made surface-to-air missiles, either SA-2's or SA-3's.

Allied aircraft also attacked a radar installation in the southern zone on April 15, the first attack in that region since January.

Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said today that Canadian officials would be included at all levels of a Pentagon investigation into the accidental bombing last week of a Canadian unit in southern Afghanistan by an American F-16. Four Canadian soldiers were killed and eight others were wounded.

He said the investigation would be concluded in 30 to 60 days. The Canadian government is also conducting an investigation of the event.

The recent skirmishing in Iraq is the most intense since last July and August. Following the Sept. 11 attacks, Iraqi attempts to shoot down allied aircraft declined, possibly because Mr. Hussein wanted to avoid provoking the United States at a time when it might be more prepared to attack him, Pentagon officials said.
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
A major concern raised by American officials is that the Iraqi military has increased the effectiveness of its aging radar systems by linking them with fiber optic lines, possibly installed by Chinese companies.
