SECTIONSSEARCHSKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEXWORLD
PLAY THE CROSSWORD

Account
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story

Rumsfeld Warns That Iraq Ties Will Hurt Russian Pocketbooks
By Thom Shanker
Aug. 22, 2002

See the article in its original context from August 22, 2002, Section A, Page 12Buy Reprints
VIEW ON TIMESMACHINE
TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers.
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld issued a stern warning to Moscow today, saying that expanding trade with Iraq would brand Russia a friend of terrorist states and frighten foreign investors away from its capital-starved economy.

''To the extent that Russia decides that it wants to parade its relationships with countries like Iraq and Libya and Syria and Cuba and North Korea, it sends a signal out across the globe that that is what Russia thinks is a good thing to do, to deal with the terrorist states,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Decisions by Russian leaders to deepen economic ties with Iraq, Mr. Rumsfeld argued, hurt Russia ''because people all across the globe, business people, can make a decision: Where do they want to put a plant? Where do they want to invest? Where do they want to have a relationship?''

Mr. Rumsfeld's comments, to Army troops at Fort Hood, Tex., after a meeting with President Bush at Crawford, Tex., were the most extensive reaction by any administration official to reports of new trade deals linking Moscow and Baghdad.
Sign Up for the Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox.

SIGN UP
ADVERTISEMENT
Continue reading the main story
Mr. Rumsfeld said he had no details about the agreements.

The secretary routinely uses the economic variables of foreign investment, tourism and trade in his equation for national security. It is a theme he struck with his Russian counterparts in the tense months before Moscow accepted, with only slight protest, the American withdrawal from the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. And he argued those points again this summer in urging India and Pakistan to retreat from confrontation over Kashmir.

Iraq has abused trade relationships allowed by the United Nations oil-for-food program to strengthen its military, Mr. Rumsfeld said.

Citing Iraq's purchase of civilian vehicles, for example, Mr. Rumsfeld said, ''Artillery and rocket pieces are put on the back of these so-called dump trucks, and they are able to continuously improve and strengthen their military capability in ways that are unhelpful to their neighbors and unhelpful to other countries.''

Mr. Rumsfeld said Russia's assessment of long-term economic benefits from ties with the West meant that relations would not be damaged if President Bush decided to order military action to topple President Saddam Hussein.

''I don't think our relationship would be affected with Russia if that were to happen,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said. ''My impression is that the Russian administration is fairly pragmatic at this stage and their interest in the United States is greater than their interest in Iraq.''
