

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS; Global Markets Gain on Optimism That Iraq War Can Be Avoided
By Bloomberg News
Feb. 18, 2003

Major stock indexes gained around the world yesterday on speculation that a war with Iraq might be delayed or averted.

Stocks extended a rally that began Friday after Hans Blix, the co-chief weapons inspector for the United Nations, said more time was needed to determine any wrongdoing, weakening the United States' case for a military strike before the Security Council meets.

''The Blix comments were certainly a catalyst'' for share price gains, said Gerd Kirsten, who manages 4 billion euros ($4.29 billion) at Deka Investment in Frankfurt. ''Money has flown into the market. We have to wait and see if it holds.''

Optimism that war could be avoided might help to restore consumer and business confidence around the world.


''The likelihood of a peaceful resolution has grown,'' said Gerald Fritz, who manages 220 million euros ($235 million) at SEB Invest in Frankfurt. ''I don't think there will be a war. Both sides have nothing to gain from it.''

European stocks also advanced as a report that increased worldwide sales of chip-making equipment in December bolstered optimism about the outlook for companies like Infineon Technologies and STMicroelectronics, the region's two biggest chip makers.

Samsung of South Korea and Sony of Japan led gains by stocks in Asia amid optimism their sales in the United States would increase after a report on Friday that American industrial production rose in January.

Benchmarks rose in all 17 of the Western European markets. The FTSE 100-stock index advanced 2.2 percent in Britain, the CAC 40 Index in France added 1.9 percent and the DAX in Germany climbed 1.3 percent.

Shares of Infineon rose 7.2 percent. Global chip equipment sales in December rose 14 percent, to $1.82 billion, compared with figures in the month a year earlier, the Semiconductor Equipment Association of Japan said. STMicroelectronics, Europe's largest chip maker, added 6.4 percent.

The Kospi index in South Korea gained 4.6 percent, its biggest gain in 11 months. The TWSE in Taiwan advanced 4.7 percent and the Nikkei 225-stock index in Japan climbed 0.8 percent, to 8,771.89.

Industrial production in the United States, the biggest trading partner for Japan and South Korea, climbed 0.7 percent in January, the most in six months, the Federal Reserve reported Friday. Economists had expected a rise of 0.3 percent.

Samsung, which generates about a fifth of its sales in the United States, where it supplies companies like Dell Computer, jumped 6.4 percent. Sony, the giant consumer-electronics maker, added 1.3 percent.
