

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AN ALLY'S BASES; Top Politician Indicates Turkey May Join U.S. Effort Against Iraq
By Dexter Filkins
Feb. 5, 2003

American officials stepped up their diplomatic campaign for permission to use Turkish military bases today, as the country's leading politician hinted that his country might be preparing to grant the American request.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan, leader of the governing Justice and Development Party, suggested today that Turkey could forfeit influence over events in Iraq if it stayed out of an American-led war. Mr. Erdogan's remarks came as the Turkish Parliament prepared to gather on Thursday to take up the American request to use Turkish military bases for a possible invasion of northern Iraq.

''The decisions we make for war are not because we want war, but so we can contribute to peace as soon as possible, at a point when it not possible to prevent war,'' Mr. Erdogan told a gathering of the party's elected officials. ''Our moral priority is peace, but our political priority is our dear Turkey.

''If one is left out of the equation at the start of the operation, it may not be possible to be in a position to control developments at the end of the operation,'' Mr. Erdogan said.

The speech marked a significant shift for Mr. Erdogan, who in the past has spoken only about the need to maintain peace in the region. He spoke on the same day that American officials, who say time is running out to enlist Turkey in a campaign against Iraq, intensified their diplomatic pressure on Turkey's leaders.

Vice President Dick Cheney called the Turkish prime minister, Abdullah Gul, today to press him on matters related to Iraq, Turkish officials said. Zalmay Khalilzad, President Bush's special envoy to the Iraqi opposition, arrived in Ankara today for two days of talks with Turkish officials.

The American ambassador, Robert Pearson, met today for 40 minutes with Ugur Ziyal, Turkey's under secretary in the foreign ministry. According to NTV, a Turkish television station, Mr. Pearson pressed Mr. Ziyal for a decision this week on whether to allow the Americans to use Turkish bases for an attack.

American officials have been pressing Turkey for weeks for permission to send as many as 80,000 troops to Turkey for a possible assault into northern Iraq. American military commanders believe that an attack across Iraq's northern border would tie up Iraqi forces that could otherwise be thrown into battle against the main American force attacking from Kuwait, thus making for a shorter and less costly war.
