

Iraq Calls U.N. Meeting On Weapons 'Constructive'
By Barbara Crossette
March 8, 2002

Iraq and the United Nations ended their first talks in more than a year today with little more to show than an Iraqi pledge to give back some stolen Kuwaiti property and an agreement to meet again in mid-April, after an important Arab League summit-level meeting.

Neither side would discuss the two rounds of talks in any detail.

The Iraqis called the meeting ''constructive and positive.'' Secretary General Kofi Annan's spokesman opted for ''frank and useful.''

However, the atmosphere around the talks was noticeably friendlier than in the past, largely owing to the cordial demeanor of the head of the Iraqi delegation, Foreign Minister Naji Sabri. Diplomats cautioned, however, that the history of dealing with Iraq is littered with apparently conciliatory bids made when President Saddam Hussein came under serious pressure. Today's talks were held with the threat of American attacks hovering in the background.

One positive development in the meetings, diplomats and United Nations officials said, was the presence at the secretary general's conference table of the executive chairman of the United Nations arms inspection commission, Hans Blix, and the Iraqi official responsible for working with inspectors inside Iraq, Maj. Gen. Hussam Mohammed Amin. The United Nations deputy legal counsel, Ralph Zacklin, also took part.


Mr. Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhart, said after the talks concluded this afternoon that the discussions had centered on ''core issues.'' United Nations officials raised the return of arms inspectors to Iraq, accounting for missing Kuwaiti and Iraqi prisoners still missing more than a decade after the 1991 gulf war, and Kuwaiti demands for the return of property stolen during the Iraqi invasion in August 1990 and the months of occupation that followed.

''On this last issue, they agreed that a concrete way will be found for Iraq to return some Kuwaiti property though the United Nations,'' Mr. Eckhart said. The topic has some importance because the United States has repeatedly pulled out such issues to argue that even if Iraq were to be declared free of arms, it has other requirements to meet.

Mr. Eckhart said that Iraq wanted to talk about the lifting of sanctions against it, the patrolling of no-flight zones by the United States and Britain over northern and southern Iraq, and the establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction across the Mideast. The last point is usually understood to mean disarming Israel, especially of nuclear weapons.
