
THREATS AND RESPONSES: JERUSALEM; Fearing an Iraqi Attack, Israelis Buy Tape and Masks
By Greg Myre
March 19, 2003

Israel stepped up war preparations today, with the military calling on citizens to set up hermetically sealed ''safe rooms'' at home in case Iraq fires a missile loaded with chemical weapons.

Hardware stores were flooded with Israelis stocking up on duct tape, plastic sheeting and flashlights, while the army's Home Front Command rolled out television broadcasts on how to use gas masks and make the safe rooms airtight.

The government's highly specific instructions say the safe room should be readied with plastic sheeting and duct tape covering windows and doors. Each person should have a liter of water, canned foods and important documents like passports.

At Jerusalem's largest shopping mall, Israelis queued in long lines in an underground parking lot to receive gas masks that have been on offer for months. Most said they had procrastinated because they did not think Iraq would target Jerusalem, with its large Palestinian population and Islamic holy sites.

The Israeli government has sought to reassure citizens, saying the probability of an Iraqi missile strike is low, even if it cannot be ruled out. ''There are no missiles in western Iraq that threaten the state of Israel, and so our assessment is that the danger is very, very small,'' Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz said in an Internet question-and-answer session with the daily Maariv.

Israel believes that even if Iraq fires Scuds, the army's Arrow anti-missile defense will be able to shoot them down. One Arrow battery has been placed south of Tel Aviv, at an air force base, while a second has been set up to guard the northern coastal cities.

Still, Israeli authorities have been drilling the entire public, including small children, to prepare them for any eventuality.

In schools, teachers seek to ease anxieties with practice drills that herd small children into the ''popcorn room,'' a sealed room that has been made child-friendly with snacks and videos.

On Israeli television, children's programs feature puppets wearing gas masks. For adults, news programs answer queries such as whether it is safe to breast feed when the gas masks are supposed to be on. The answer is no, because the baby would not be protected.

Schools and businesses are operating as usual, while hardware stores were staying open around the clock in the Tel Aviv area. The government has set prices for emergency equipment, and established a hotline for consumers who suspect price gouging.
