

THREATS AND RESPONSES: TOKYO; Japan Premier Supports U.S. On Iraq Stance
By Howard W. French
March 19, 2003

In the face of strong and growing opposition, the Japanese prime minister, Junichiro Koizumi, expressed strong support today for the United States' ultimatum to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to leave his country within 48 hours or face war.

''Now that it is determined that the extremely dangerous regime of Hussein has no intention to disarm, I believe it appropriate to support America's use of force,'' Mr. Koizumi told a news conference Tuesday.

Mr. Koizumi's foreign minister, Yoriko Kawaguchi, reinforced the Japanese government's message on Tuesday in a meeting with Iraq's interim chargé d'affaires, Qasim Shakir. ''If Iraq paves the way for the abolition of its weapons of mass destruction with the exile of President Hussein, the Iraqi people will be able to avoid damage stemming from military action,'' Ms. Kawaguchi was quoted as telling the envoy.

''Prime Minister Koizumi made it clear that because of the constitutional constraints, Japan will not participate in any military action against Iraq,'' said Hatsuhisa Takashima, a foreign ministry spokesman. ''However, the government of Japan will make a thorough study on how to help the rehabilitation and reconstruction of postwar Iraq and contribute to international peace and stability while making utmost efforts to secure the safety of Japanese nationals and to prevent any economic disruption.''

Japan's support of American policy toward Iraq has scarcely been in doubt here. But with his public opinion ratings plummeting and opposition to the war rising, Mr. Koizumi had always been careful to hedge his statements. Recently he said that Japan's response to any American attack on Iraq would depend on ''the climate of the moment.''

A Kyodo News Agency poll conducted Saturday and Sunday put the prime minister's support at 41 percent, his lowest ever. Of the respondents, 53 percent said the government should not back an attack on Iraq. Another Kyodo survey suggested that 68 percent of the country's legislators did not support an attack regardless of whether a United Nations resolution authorizing war was adopted. Numerous recent polls here have shown that over 80 percent of Japanese oppose Washington's threatened use of force in Iraq Japan's streets have grown lively with antiwar protests.

Despite public opinion against the war, Mr. Koizumi said that no additional Security Council resolution would be necessary before the expected attack on Iraq, because past resolutions had already legitimized the use of force to disarm Iraq.
