

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AT THE U.N.; Inspectors Set Terms for Talks With Baghdad
By Julia Preston
Feb. 1, 2003

The chief United Nations weapons inspectors, Hans Blix and Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, declined today to accept outright an invitation from Iraq to return there for talks by Feb. 10, insisting instead that they would go only if real progress could be made.

President Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, at a news conference after their meeting today in Washington, both dismissed the invitation as a delaying tactic by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.

''The idea of calling inspectors in to negotiate is a charade,'' Mr. Bush said.

Mr. Blair followed, ''If you look back at the history of this, for 12 years'' Mr. Hussein ''has played these games.''

Late today, Mr. Blix and Dr. ElBaradei sent a joint letter of response, in which they asked Iraq to clarify its intentions.

''They are willing to meet with the Iraqi side once certain understandings are reached as to the purpose of the visit, namely how to achieve prompt progress on the open disarmament issues,'' said Ewen Buchanan, the spokesman for Mr. Blix.

United Nations officials here and in Vienna said that in the letter the chief inspectors insisted on resolving a dispute over a U-2 aerial photographic reconnaissance plane they want to use in their work. Baghdad has so far denied permission.

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell plans to discuss Iraq's obstruction of the U-2 flights in his presentation to the Security Council on Wednesday, United States officials said.

The inspection chiefs also demanded that Iraqi officials clear away any obstacles to private interviews by inspectors with Iraqi arms scientists. So far Iraqi weapons experts have refused all private interviews, insisting that a government official be present.

Iraq extended the invitation on Thursday in a letter to the inspections chiefs from Gen. Amir Hammudi al-Saadi, Baghdad's chief liaison official with their teams. The general said the new round of talks should be aimed at ''boosting cooperation and transparency.''

Mr. Blix, the chief biological and chemical inspector, responded today to hints from Iraq that he and Dr. ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, might be invited to meet Mr. Hussein. He said he would warn the Iraqi leader of the ''dangerous situation'' he faces.

Iraq is seeking another meeting with the chief inspectors several days before Feb. 14, the next time they are scheduled to brief the Security Council on their work.
