

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AIRSTRIKES; U.S. and Iraq Differ Over Results Of Attack on Antiaircraft Site
By Thom Shanker
Sept. 27, 2002

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld today vehemently denied Iraq's assertions that civilians had been injured in the most recent bombing of an Iraqi antiaircraft site, and one official produced a classified photograph to show that the target was distant from any houses, stores or major roads.

But the surveillance photograph also showed that two precision-guided weapons aimed at the radar struck some distance from their intended target. The official pointed to two scars in the empty desert where the ordnance apparently smacked into the sand.

Two air defense facilities in southern Iraq -- one at Basra, about 245 miles southeast of Baghdad, and one at Al Kufa, about 80 miles south of the capital -- were bombed on Wednesday after allied warplanes came under fire.

The official Iraqi News Agency quoted government officials as saying that the targets were ''civilian and service installations,'' and that a civilian was among those injured at Basra.

That brought a harsh response from Mr. Rumsfeld, who accused the Iraqis of lying to inflame public opinion against the United States.

''You've got all kinds of intelligence information of how they sit down and figure out how they're going to dupe the world,'' he said, ''how they're going to put out information that will be fundamentally damaging to the United States of America and to anyone opposing them, and fool the media.''

Gen. Peter Pace, vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the Basra airport handles both civilian and military aircraft, but he said the radar site was in an isolated stretch of desert beyond the military side of the airfield.

''The only reason anybody would be out in this vicinity of this particular radar at any time of day would be to actually be functioning as a part of that radar team,'' he said.

The United States and Britain enforce no-flight zones over northern and southern Iraq, which the government in Baghdad rejects as a violation of its sovereignty.

Allied warplanes have been targeted or attacked more than 140 times this year, officials said. In retaliation, allied warplanes have bombed radar sites, communications links and command centers 41 times this year.

In addition to protecting the jets, the attacks degrade Iraq's air defenses -- and gather intelligence on how they operate -- at a time when President Bush is considering military action to topple President Saddam Hussein.
