

Iraq Speech By Cheney Is Criticized By Schröder
By Steven Erlanger
Aug. 28, 2002

Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany has criticized the speech on Monday by Vice President Dick Cheney, saying that it signals a mistaken shift in American aims regarding Iraq.

In an interview broadcast tonight on RTL television, Mr. Schröder said the goal of the Bush administration no longer seems to be to persuade Iraq to allow unconditional arms inspections by United Nations experts. Instead, he said, the American goal seems to be to remove Mr. Hussein by military means regardless of whether inspections occur, which he says will undermine the chance of getting Iraq to allow the inspections.

''If the aim changes now, then it's one's own responsibility,'' Mr. Schröder said. ''If somebody is to be removed with the aid of a military intervention, you can hardly convince him to let inspectors into his country. It's the change of aim that is the mistake.''

European governments, including America's closest ally, Britain, have emphasized international pressure, including the threat of force, to make Iraq comply with United Nations resolutions and to allow unfettered arms inspections.

The British Foreign Secretary, Jack Straw, has said weapons inspections are the best way of reducing the threat posed by Mr. Hussein.

Military action had to remain an option but the possibility of an attack would ''recede,'' Mr. Straw said, if other ways of addressing the risk of Iraq were found.

But Mr. Cheney dismissed new inspections as an answer to the Iraqi problem, saying: ''A return of inspectors would provide no assurance whatsoever of his compliance with U.N. resolutions. On the contrary, there is a great danger that it would provide false comfort that Saddam was somehow back in his box. Meanwhile, he would continue to plot.''

If the abandonment of weapons inspections as a goal is confirmed as American policy, then European governments would have an even harder time justifying a war to their constituents.

Many Western diplomats contend that Washington will have to make a major last effort to get Iraq to agree to inspections before America's allies could support any war there.

''No European democracy can sidestep the need to make a serious step to go back to the U.N. resolution and impose inspectors on Iraq,'' said Karl Kaiser, director of the German Council on Foreign Relations.

''Washington is wrong to think otherwise,'' he added. ''Even Tony Blair needs some last effort at the United Nations.''
