

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WARNING THE IRAQIS; Allies Drop Leaflets Urging Iraqis to Hold Fire
By Thom Shanker
Oct. 4, 2002

Allied warplanes attacked an air-defense headquarters south of Baghdad today after Iraqi attempts to shoot down a plane dropping thousands of leaflets urging Iraqi gunners to stop firing at American and British jets, military officials said.

''You could be next,'' the leaflet warned in Arabic.

About 120,000 of the leaflets were dropped early today over Tallil, 160 miles southeast of Baghdad, officials said. Beneath a cartoon-like drawing of a jet attacking a radar site and a missile battery was the caption, ''Don't track or fire on coalition aircraft!''

''The destruction experienced by your colleagues in other air defense locations is a response to your continuing aggression toward planes of the coalition forces,'' the leaflet said, according to a translation supplied by the United States Central Command. ''No tracking or firing on these aircraft will be tolerated.''

Cmdr. Frank Merriman, a Central Command spokesman, said the plane dropping the leaflets had come under fire from Iraqi antiaircraft artillery and surface-to-air missiles. Jets from the American and British units enforcing the ''no flight'' zone over southern Iraq responded by attacking the regional air-defense headquarters, he said. As a matter of policy, military officials decline to say whether American or British planes are involved in a specific operation.

By late today, military officials had no final assessment of the damage to the headquarters.

The attack brought to 46 the number of days on which coalition jets have attacked targets in the no-flight zones of northern and southern Iraq, which were set up by the United States and its allies after the Persian Gulf war in 1991.

The Baghdad government maintains that United Nations resolutions calling for the protection of Kurdish populations in the north and the Shiite population in southern Iraq do not include provisions empowering the United States and its allies to use military force, and Iraq rejects the no-flight zones as an infringement of its sovereignty.

Iraq has attacked allied warplanes over northern and southern Iraq more than 400 times this year, according to Pentagon statistics. Similar leaflets urging Iraqi gunners to hold their fire were dropped a year ago, officials said.

Senior Pentagon officials has made clear that if President Bush orders full-scale military operations to oust President Saddam Hussein, then psychological operations to dissuade Iraqi troops from obeying 