

A NATION AT WAR: THE CORRESPONDENT; Peter Arnett Tells Iraqi State Television Allied War Plan Has Failed
By Jim Rutenberg
March 31, 2003

Peter Arnett, a correspondent based in Baghdad for NBC News and National Geographic Explorer, told Iraqi state television yesterday that his reporting about Iraqi civilian casualties ''helps those who oppose the war.''

The allied war plan, he said, ''has failed because of Iraqi resistance.''

The comments were likely to make Mr. Arnett a renewed target of Republican lawmakers, many of whom already contend that his reporting is slanted in favor of the Iraqis. Iraqi television showed the interview at least twice yesterday afternoon. CNN and Fox News Channel showed excerpts last night.

Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida, said on Fox News Channel that she found the interview ''nauseating.'' She added, ''It's incredible he would be kowtowing to what clearly is the enemy in this way.''

NBC and National Geographic defended Mr. Arnett and praised him for risking his life to deliver news from Baghdad. They said in a joint statement that Iraqi TV officials asked Mr. Arnett if he would grant an interview. ''Out of professional courtesy he answered their questions,'' the statement said. ''He saw it as purely analysis.''

Asked if they would allow their reporters to be interviewed by Iraqi television in the current climate, CNN and Fox News Channel said they would not; CBS said it probably would not. An ABC News spokesman would say only that its freelance correspondent in Baghdad, Richard Engel, is ''out there getting interviews, not giving them.''

Mr. Arnett was a CNN correspondent in Baghdad during the Persian Gulf war in 1991. The Iraqis evicted all major Western television correspondents except Mr. Arnett. Iraqi officials said then that Mr. Arnett had ''proven impartiality.''

The White House had no comment last night.

In the interview yesterday, Mr. Arnett said American war planners had failed to pay attention to his reporting. ''In my commentaries on television I would tell the Americans about the determination of the Iraqi forces, the determination of the government, and the willingness to fight for their country,'' he said.

Several network executives criticized Mr. Arnett for praising Iraqi officials for their cooperation with the news media. Iraq has ordered a number of journalists, including those from CNN and Fox News, to leave the country. Two Newsday reporters disappeared after being expelled and the newspaper has raised the possibility that they are being held by Iraqi authorities.
