

THREATS AND RESPONSES: POSTWAR PLANS; Report Urges Iraqi Control Of Rebuilding After Hussein
By Jeff Gerth
Dec. 18, 2002

A panel of experts has recommended that the United States ensure that Iraqis select their own government and control their vital oil industry in the event that Saddam Hussein is removed by military action.

The group's proposal for reconstruction and reconciliation in a postwar Iraq strikes a cautionary tone about counting on Iraq's oil reserves, the second largest in the world, to stabilize and rebuild the country's troubled economy.

''The allure of Iraq's oil is tantalizing,'' said Amy Myers Jaffe, the senior energy adviser at the James A. Baker III Institute for Public Policy at Rice University, ''but it is also potentially destabilizing if it is not handled right.''

The study, sponsored by the Baker Institute and the Council on Foreign Relations, warned that ''a heavy American hand'' would only convince the Iraqis, as well as ''the rest of the world, that the operation against Iraq was undertaken for imperialist, rather than disarmament, reasons.''

The panel, headed by two former American diplomats, Edward P. Djerejian and Frank G. Wisner, called for a ''level playing field for all international players to participate in future repair, development, and exploration efforts.''

For now, American oil companies have adopted a hands-off approach to Iraq, largely because economic sanctions prohibit any deals. Some Russian and European companies, by contrast, have struck tentative deals but last week Iraq canceled the largest of those pacts, a multibillion dollar agreement with a leading Russian oil company.

The group's study highlighted the political and economic quandaries inherent in Iraq's reconstruction.

Oil revenues could resuscitate Iraqi's economy, but huge investments are needed to rebuild an industry in dire straits -- an estimated $5 billion to repair Iraq's oil export facilities and another $20 billion to rebuild its power grid, for example.

Iraq's oil industry has a long history -- it was a founding member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries -- but, the report noted, it will also need to attract $30 billion to $40 billion in new foreign investment to rehabilitate active wells and to develop new fields.

''Iraq is no different than any of the other countries in the Persian Gulf,'' said Ms. Jaffe, a panel member, ''in terms of the debate over whether to share the wealth with outside companies in return for access to their technology.''
