

THREATS AND RESPONSES: EUROPE; NATO Talks Fail to Mend Rift Over Iraq and Defense of Turkey
By Richard Bernstein
Feb. 12, 2003

The members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization failed today to heal the rift that erupted on Monday over Iraq, causing one of the worst crises the alliance has ever faced.

Though representatives of the 19 member countries met three times today -- once in the morning, once for lunch and once in the early evening -- the two sides remained too far apart for further discussions to be useful today, said Yves Brodeur, a NATO spokesman.

The argument came into the open when France, Germany and Belgium blocked an initiative, supported by the organization's other 16 members, to begin military contingency planning to defend Turkey in case it was attacked during military operations against Iraq.

After the blocking move, Turkey took the unusual step of invoking Article IV of the NATO agreement, which requires all members to consult if any one of them feels threatened.

But during the day the three countries that had blocked planning refused to change their essential position, which is that authorizing a role for NATO would have the effect of committing the organization to a military solution before all the diplomatic possibilities had been exhausted.

While the meetings here were under way, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, speaking at a Congressional hearing in Washington, accused France, Germany and Belgium of playing politics with the alliance, using their position on Turkey to ''signal their disagreement with the approach that we need, to bring this to a resolution with Iraq in the very near future at the U.N.''

''This is the time for the alliance to say to a fellow alliance member, we agree with you, and if you are concerned, we are concerned,'' he said. ''That's what alliances are all about.''

But the NATO dissidents, all of whom have urged more time for United Nations inspections, continue to maintain that to begin military planning would ''send the wrong signal'' even before the inspectors delivered their scheduled report to the United Nations on Friday.

''We assume that there is still space for diplomacy and we should use this space, and we don't see any reason NATO should enforce a policy not in line with what we are trying to achieve,'' Benoît D'Aboville, the French ambassador to NATO, said after the dispute had become public.
