

THREATS AND RESPONSES; Iraqi Denies Missiles Break Rules
By Bill Carter
Feb. 26, 2003

In a segment of an interview with the CBS News anchor Dan Rather, broadcast last night, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq disputed the notion that his nation possesses missiles that United Nations weapons inspectors have ordered destroyed.

''We have no missiles outside the specifications of the United Nations, and the inspection teams are here and they're looking,'' Mr. Hussein said. ''So, the missiles that are against the resolution of the United Nations, these do not exist. And they have been destroyed.''

For the interview, the first granted by Mr. Hussein to an American journalist in 10 years, the Iraqi leader was shown sitting at a table surrounded by aides as he repeated a challenge to President Bush to a debate on the issues surrounding American demands that Iraq disarm.

''We are not asking for a contest with weapons,'' he said. ''All I'm asking is to appear before the American people and other people in a direct discussion. This is an opportunity for him, if he is really convinced about his position, about preparations for war, or any other means, to convince the whole world about the reasons that justify war. And it's an opportunity for us to tell the world about our reasons to want to live in peace.''

The three-hour interview, which Mr. Rather said took place in a Baghdad palace, will be presented in full tonight at 9 p.m. on the CBS newsmagazine program ''60 Minutes II.''

In a news release highlighting the portions of the interview that will be on that program, CBS quoted Mr. Hussein as saying that he will not go into exile to avoid a war.

The news release said Mr. Hussein denied that Iraq would set fire to its oil wells or blow up its dams to impede invaders.

''Iraq does not burn its wealth and it does not destroy its dams,'' the news release quoted Mr. Hussein as saying. ''We hope, however, that this question is not meant as an insinuation, so that the Iraqi dams and the Iraqi oil wells will be destroyed by those who will invade Iraq in their possible invasion of the country.''

Until the newsmagazine program is broadcast, CBS has decided to release only short segments of Mr. Hussein's comments. Last night's section was less than four minutes long.
