

The World; If the Scuds Were Going to Iraq
By Thom Shanker
Dec. 15, 2002

ALTHOUGH the United States tries mightily to discourage the trade of high-tech weaponry into unstable regions, the Bush administration had little practical choice last week but to let a shipment of Scud missiles sail on to Yemen from North Korea.

The initial seizure of the freighter and its cargo was certainly legal: the vessel was flying no flag and its markings were obscured by paint, rendering it a stateless, lawless vessel not unlike a pirate ship.

But this commercial transaction for armament between two nations was not barred by any treaty either had signed, and President Bush ordered the ship set free.

It would have been different had the ultimate buyer proved to be, say, Iraq, or a stateless terrorist network.

If Baghdad was in on the deal, the missiles could have been confiscated under United Nations sanctions on arms sales to Iraq. Or Mr. Bush could have said that Iraq was in breach of United Nations resolutions and that he had grounds for war.

The missiles could also have been seized forever if the buyer was an organization that wasn't a state -- Al Qaeda, for example.

Even with last week's sale, some international lawyers say paperwork could have been thrown at the problem in an attempt to tie up the ship and its cargo for years. Because it flew no flag, the vessel might have been held until its last legal owner laid claim.

That owner might have given permission to destroy the cargo. Or the cargo might have been locked up, having been shipped under false manifest.

Any idea of trying those tactics, though, fell before the dictates of diplomacy and the logic of maintaining an alliance.

Simply put, Yemen was deemed too valuable a partner in the campaign to eradicate terrorism.

In fact, it was the hunt for Al Qaeda that made the seizure possible. During the war in Afghanistan, the United States organized patrols in and near the Arabian Sea to stop terrorists trying to flee for lawless regions in the Horn of Africa. About 10 countries volunteered vessels.

Even with the dispiriting outcome, last week's maritime seizure had one redeeming effect, administration officials said.

It made it clear, they said, that America can detect clandestine arms shipments and, with its allies, stop them at sea.
