

THREATS AND RESPONSES: AMSTERDAM; On Tip, Dutch Border Police Detain Iraqi Kurdish Militant
By Walter Gibbs
Sept. 14, 2002

A reputed Iraqi Kurd guerrilla leader who has refugee status in Norway and has been linked by some Americans to Al Qaeda has been detained in Amsterdam, according to Norwegian and Dutch officials.

The man, Najmuddin Faraj Ahmad, better known as Mullah Krekar, was deported by Iran on Thursday, the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement.

Mr. Ahmad was apparently on the way to Oslo when Dutch border officials, acting on what they called an intelligence tip, stopped him late Thursday at Schiphol Airport and notified the American and Norwegian authorities.

Mr. Ahmad, 46, is widely reported to be the leader of Ansar al-Islam, a militant Islamist group opposed to the American-backed Kurdish establishment in northern Iraq. Known in English as Supporters of Islam, the group of several hundred fighters is an enemy of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, or PUK, whose aim is an independent but secular Kurdistan.

In Washington, an administration official said today that officials were aware that Mr. Ahmad was being detained. ''He's obviously a person of interest,'' the official said.

In the past, senior American intelligence officials have said that some Iraqi fighters who opposed the United States in Afghanistan have now drifted back to Iraq and joined ranks with Ansar al-Islam. The group's attacks on the Kurdish leadership give it common cause with Saddam Hussein, though a firm link with the Iraqi dictator has not been established.

Hard-liners in the Bush administration reportedly believe the organization established chemical weapon-making facilities in certain Iraqi villages that it controls near the Iranian border.

According to Norwegian state television, NRK, Mr. Ahmad underwent military training in Afghanistan in the 1980's with people later associated with Al Qaeda. In the early 1990's, he became military chief of the Islamic Movement of Kurdistan.

After Mr. Ahmad received refugee status in Norway in 1991 as part of a United Nations resettlement program, his family joined him in Oslo, but he soon began spending long periods of time outside the country, officials here said.

Last April, NRK traced Mr. Ahmad to Bierra, in northern Iraq, where he praised Osama bin Laden in an interview. He urged Norway not to back the United States in upcoming conflicts ''so that it won't suffer later.''
