
A NATION AT WAR: DAMASCUS; Iraqis in Exile Doubt Hussein's Speech Could Inspire Jihad
By Neil MacFarquhar
March 21, 2003

Iraqi exiles here expressed doubt today that Muslims would take up Saddam Hussein's call this morning for jihad in response to the American-led invasion of Iraq.

Although there is a widespread perception in the Middle East that the United States attack is a modern crusade against Islam, the idea that the Iraqi leader could inspire religious zealots is considered far-fetched.

''Jihad has to be called for by someone respected by Muslims,'' said Jewad M. al-Maliki, the Damascus representative of Al Dawa, an Iranian-backed Islamic group whose members have remained underground since they were heavily repressed around 1980.

Mr. Maliki, noting the numbers of religious leaders that the Iraqi president has executed over the years, said, ''No one will respond to him because he violated the sanctity of the faith.''


Both ordinary refugees and the organized opposition groups that maintain offices here said they were fearful of extensive civilian casualties in Iraqi cities as government officials try to hide among the civilian population.

The government has prepared up to 900 houses in Baghdad alone to use as substitute ministries, broadcast centers and safe houses for Mr. Hussein, his aides and the intelligence services, said Bayan Jabor, the Syrian representative for the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq.

Opposition figures said Mr. Hussein was believed to be setting up multiple studios for broadcasts, at least by radio.

The loss of the ability to broadcast is considered to have been an important factor in the 1991 uprising, during which much of the predominately Shiite south and the mainly Kurdish north took up arms against local Baath Party officials and other government representatives. The silence then from Baghdad fostered the idea that the government had fallen.

''If the transmissions fail this time, Saddam will definitely fall,'' said Mr. Jabor.

Still, he and many other Iraqis here expressed doubt that there would be any immediate uprising in the south to accompany an invasion.

There are lingering fears of a repeat of what occurred in 1991 when the first President Bush encouraged a rebellion and then left those who took part to be slaughtered.

Iraqis from the south say the armed forces have in recent weeks been rearresting those suspected of having any role in the 1991 uprising.
