

A NATION AT WAR: BRITAIN; Bodies of First 10 British Soldiers Killed in Iraqi Fighting Are Brought Home
By Lizette Alvarez
March 30, 2003

The bodies of the first 10 British soldiers to die in the war in Iraq arrived at an airfield in Britain today, where their commanders, relatives and fellow soldiers awaited in a simple, somber military ceremony.

The coffins were taken off a giant C-17 cargo plane at Brize Norton Air Base in Oxfordshire one at a time, shoulder-high, by soldiers who walked slowly across the tarmac.

For the relatives gathered at the passenger terminal, the arrival of the bodies was particularly emotional because none of the 10 men were killed in combat.

Eight died when an American Sea Knight helicopter crashed south of the Kuwaiti border on March 21. The other two were killed by American fire last Sunday, when a patriot missile shot down their Royal Air Force GR4 Tornado aircraft, which was also traveling near the Kuwaiti border.


Only 4 of the 23 British war dead have died in combat. Fourteen others have died in helicopter crashes and five in accidents involving coalition forces.

At the ceremony, a band from the Royal Marines played funeral music by Handel, Beethoven and Mendelssohn as the coffins, swathed in flags, were slid into hearses as nearby soldiers and officers saluted.

They were then driven to a temporary morgue in a gymnasium at the air base, where a coroner will conduct an investigation into their deaths.

The ceremony was attended by Prince Andrew, who served as a Royal Navy officer in the Falklands conflict in 1982.

He was present in an unofficial capacity, as a military man, not as a member of the Royal Family.

Defense Minister Geoffrey Hoon also attended the ceremony, the first to take place since the war began, along with senior military and defense officials, including the commandant general of the Royal Marines, Maj. Gen. Tony Milton, and other top officers.

After the belly of the cargo plane opened, the coffins were taken out, first in order of seniority in each military service and then the seniority of each individual serviceman. The pallbearers wore crisp blue or gray uniforms with white belts and gloves, and once they slid the final coffin into its hearse, the band stopped playing and marched slowly away.

Family members will hold private burials for the dead soldiers.
