

THREATS AND RESPONSES: JAKARTA; Indonesia Opposes Use of Military Power to Topple Iraqi Leader
By Jane Perlez
Jan. 9, 2003

Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim nation, opposes military action to topple the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, the foreign minister said today.

The minister, Hassan Wirajuda, said ''regime change'' through military intervention ''would be difficult to accept.'' Instead, he said, Indonesia supports ''every effort on the disarmament of weapons of mass destruction through the United Nations Security Council.''

Indonesian government officials, preoccupied by the aftermath of the Bali attack in October, which killed almost 200 people, and the threat of terrorism at home, have said little about Iraq.

The foreign minister said he would question the British foreign minister, Jack Straw, during a meeting in Jakarta on Thursday, about any evidence of Iraq's possession of weapons of mass destruction. Twenty-six British citizens were killed at Bali.


Western diplomats said there had been no expectation that Indonesia would support intervention against Iraq. The hope, said one diplomat, was to persuade the government to keep its statements on Iraq as moderate as possible.

The minister's comments, part of a presentation to the news media on Indonesia's foreign policy in the past year, were fairly low key, and stressed the importance of the United Nations. But they appeared to reflect an unease among some Indonesian officials at the prospect of widespread anti-American protests in the event of a war against Iraq.

The minister for political and security affairs, Gen. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, has warned publicly that an American-led war against Iraq would set off anti-American demonstrations.

During the American strikes against Afghanistan in 2001, the United States Embassy became the scene of large demonstrations over a period of more than three weeks. At that time, a number of leaders made scathing statements about the United States.

A war against Iraq could serve to embolden Islamic militants, who have been on the defensive since the roundup of more than a dozen suspects in the Bali bombing, several officials said.

An American expert on Indonesian Islam, Dr. Robin Bush, told the American Chamber of Commerce this week that foreign businesses should be prepared for protests if war started.

''Be prepared for the fact it will be messy,'' said Dr. Bush, who heads the Islam and civil society program at the Asia Foundation.
