

Senate Panel to Ask Bush Aides To Give Details on His Iraq Policy
By James Dao
July 10, 2002

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee plans to hold hearings later this summer to question senior administration officials on their Iraq policy, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the committee chairman, said today.

With some in the administration saying that an invasion could begin early next year, Mr. Biden said the time had come for a full public airing of how the goal of removing Saddam Hussein from power might be accomplished.

''I want them to define their objectives in Iraq,'' Mr. Biden said. ''I want to know what scenarios there are for eliminating the chemical and biological weapons that Iraq may use if we attack. I'd like to know how important our allies are in this.''

Perhaps most important, Mr. Biden said, is who would replace Mr. Hussein if the United States succeeded in ousting him -- a question that has caused much debate between Washington and its allies and within the administration itself.

Mr. Biden asserted that the reason President Bush's father declined to invade Baghdad during the gulf war in the early 90's was the lack of a clear Hussein successor, without whom he was concerned that the country would collapse into anarchy.

Relating a recent conversation with President Bush, Mr. Biden said: ''He always kids me, he says: 'Well you agree with me on Saddam, why don't you agree with my methods?' I always kid him and say: 'Mr. President, there's a reason why your father stopped and didn't go to Baghdad. He didn't want to stay five years.' ''

Mr. Biden said he hoped to hold hearings before Labor Day, but his aides said they would more likely occur in late September.

A spokesman for Senator Richard G. Lugar, an Indiana Republican who is the second-ranking Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, said Mr. Lugar would support holding hearings as a way of building public support for potential military action -- particularly because it might involve heavy casualties.

Though the administration has said that it has no formal plans for invading Iraq, the Pentagon has been developing proposals that call for deploying as many as 250,000 troops in a combined air, land and sea assault from the north, south and west.
