

The World: Hearing Osama; Al Qaeda's Audience in Iraq
By C.j. Chivers
Feb. 16, 2003

THE audiotape thought to carry the words of Osama bin Laden traveled the airwaves last week, imploring Muslims to wage war against supporters of the United States. The faint voice almost certainly reached a compound in Sarget, a village in northern Iraq that is out of the control of both Saddam Hussein and the pro-American Kurds who govern the region.

The territory is held by Ansar al-Islam, a Taliban-like party the Bush administration says links Al Qaeda and Mr. Hussein. Ansar's militants are accused of dispatching suicide bombers and assassins, and of waging a civil war with the secular Kurdish government. Their ranks are thought to be 650 strong, including fighters who fled Afghanistan. American intelligence teams have been along this front since last fall.

In last week's audiotape, the Ansar militants received encouragement for whatever lies ahead. ''Take the earth as your shelter,'' the voice said, according to a translation by The Associated Press. ''Our mujahedeen brothers in Iraq, don't worry about American lies concerning their power and their smart bombs.''

Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, speaking to the United Nations Security Council on Feb. 5, said the Sarget compound is an explosives and poisons plant. In response, Ansar allowed a small group of journalists to visit last weekend, but neither Mr. Powell's claim, nor the militants' denials, could be verified. No United Nations inspectors have been to the site.

It was a brief encounter, and some fighters showed flashes of menace. When four photographers climbed a ridge, a fighter loaded his rifle and ordered them to return. ''Give me a machine gun, I want to kill them all,'' he said.

After an argument, the visitors departed down a mountain road, past small caves they were forbidden to photograph. The place looked like Tora Bora.

A few hours later, Ansar's militants assassinated a minister of the Kurdish parliament and two security officials in a nearby village. Eleven other people were injured and four were killed, including an 8-year-old girl.

Then came the voice on the tape, indicating that Mr. bin Laden's war, with all of its unsparing tactics, would go on. C.J. CHIVERS
