
THREATS AND RESPONSES: DIPLOMACY; France and Germany Pushing For Extended Iraq Inspections
By Craig S. Smith
Feb. 10, 2003

Diplomatic efforts to avert war in Iraq intensified in Europe today, with France and Germany, supported by Russia, collaborating on proposals to give United Nations weapons inspectors more time.

France and Germany denied reports that they were working on a secret plan to disarm Iraq while avoiding war, but confirmed they were in talks about strengthening United Nations' weapons inspections based on proposals made by the French last week.

The German magazine Der Spiegel reported on Saturday that the two countries were working on a plan to intensify inspections in Iraq while deploying thousands of United Nations troops to enforce tighter penalties -- all in a bid to head off an American-led attack to rid Iraq of weapons of mass destruction. The possibility of such a secret plan between Europe's two staunchest opponents of quick American action against Iraq roiled trans-Atlantic diplomacy over the weekend.

''France confirms there is no secret Franco-German plan on Iraqi disarmament,'' a French Foreign Ministry spokesman, Bernard Valero, said today. In Germany, Chancellor Gerhard Schröder also said there was no secret plan.


But officials in both countries said they were conferring on how to resolve the Iraq crisis based on France's proposals at the United Nations Security Council last week for more rigorous inspections. And Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, meeting with Mr. Schröder in Berlin today, said he agreed with the purpose of the French and German talks.

Mr. Putin is to arrive in Paris on Monday for talks with President Jacques Chirac, raising the possibility that the three countries, all United Nations Security Council members, will join in an effort to delay military action.

''Anyone who follows events around Iraq can see that, in essence, the positions of Russia, France and Germany practically coincide,'' Mr. Putin said after talks with Mr. Schröder. ''Our foreign ministers and U.N. representatives are coordinating their actions. China also has such a position.''

A senior French government official said nothing had been discussed that the Americans were not aware of and that the proposals to date did not go beyond the mandate given by United Nations.
