

THE MARKETS: COMMODITIES; As Iraq Rejects New U.N. Rules, Oil Prices Hit a 19-Month High
By Bloomberg News
Sept. 24, 2002

Crude oil rose to a 19-month high yesterday after Iraq refused to accept new United Nations resolutions on weapons inspections, raising the chances of a United States attack on Iraq, the supplier of 2 percent of the world's oil.

President Bush called on the United Nations to adopt a ''strong resolution'' to disarm Iraq and said Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader, had deceived the world about weapons of mass destruction. The rally was also spurred by a tropical storm that has delayed United States oil imports.

''With Iraq rejecting resolutions, we're another step closer to a war,'' said Thomas P. Bentz, an analyst and broker at BNP Paribas Futures in New York.

Crude oil for November delivery rose 87 cents, or 2.9 percent, to $30.71 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the highest closing price since Feb. 9, 2001. The threat of an invasion of Iraq has helped lift oil prices 55 percent this year.

Iraq said on Saturday that it would not accept resolutions countering its agreement with Secretary General Kofi Annan on the return of United Nations weapons inspectors, the official Iraq News Agency said. Iraq agreed last week to the resumption of inspections -- without conditions, but based on previous resolutions.

This week, Congress is scheduled to discuss President Bush's request for authority to use force against Iraq. ''The Iraqi rejection will upset Bush and Congress,'' said Kyle Cooper, an analyst at Salomon Smith Barney in Houston. ''Statements of that sort will help Bush push his resolution through Congress, setting us up for a showdown.''

In other markets, natural gas futures had their biggest gain in a month on speculation that Tropical Storm Isidore would regain hurricane strength in the Gulf of Mexico by today and would threaten offshore production platforms.

October-delivery natural gas rose 22 cents, or 5.9 percent, to $3.978 per million British thermal units on the New York Mercantile Exchange. The gain was the biggest for a most- active contract since Aug. 22 and the highest closing price since June 2001. Prices are up 55 percent this year.
