

THREATS AND RESPONSES: WEAPONS MONITORING; A Top Inspector Rebukes Iraq for Blocking Reconnaissance Flights
By Julia Preston
Jan. 24, 2003

Hans Blix, the chief United Nations inspector for chemical and biological weapons, said today that Iraq's cooperation with inspections had been a ''mixed bag'' and criticized Baghdad for blocking U-2 aerial photography flights.

Speaking to reporters at midday, Mr. Blix urged Iraq to follow the example of South Africa, which voluntarily disclosed and dismantled its nuclear weapons program in the early 1990's. Whether by coincidence or design, his terms echoed Deputy Defense Secretary Paul D. Wolfowitz, who gave an address on Iraqi disarmament in New York at the same hour.

By identifying all its nuclear arms programs to inspectors, Mr. Blix said, South Africa demonstrated its ''will and eagerness'' to be believed by the world, ''thereby setting an example, I think, for Iraq.''

Mr. Blix's remarks previewed a major report he will give, along with the top nuclear inspector, Mohamed ElBaradei, to the Security Council on Monday. He spoke during a break from an all-day private meeting here of the board of 16 commissioners who guide the work of his chemical and biological weapons team.

Mr. Blix said that Iraq was sending too many ''minders'' to follow the inspectors. ''Sometimes we had a proportion of five minders to one inspector,'' he said. Resolution 1441, which governs the inspections, authorizes arms experts to conduct surprise visits at any time without government supervision.

Mr. Blix also reported that the inspectors had not been able to fly a helicopter to one of the no-flight zones in Iraq that are patrolled by allied warplanes, although he said the problem had been resolved.

He noted that Iraq had been helpful in setting up infrastructure for the inspections, but he hinted that he still had many frustrations.

''If Iraq showed cooperation in all respects, than what is asked of them could be a fast process,'' he said.

Mr. Wolfowitz cited South Africa, along with Ukraine and Kazakhstan, as a country that had disarmed voluntarily. He rebuked Iraq for not allowing flights of the U-2 reconnaissance plane that the United States has turned over to the inspectors.
