

THREATS AND RESPONSES: SECURITY COUNCIL; U.S. Seeks to Delay U.N.'s Iraq Aid
By Julia Preston
Dec. 4, 2002

The United States, to the frustration of many Security Council nations, proposed today to delay for two weeks the renewal of an aid program for Iraq in order to add about 40 items to a list of imports prohibited under the program.

Senior Bush administration officials met in Washington today to revise the list of goods they want to add immediately to the United Nations roster of banned imports. The officials contend they are ''dual use'' items, civilian goods that could be used for military purposes.

One item Washington proposes to add to the list is advanced flight simulators used to train jet pilots, according to United Nations diplomats familiar with the discussions in the Council today. Administration officials fear the simulators could be used to train Iraqi military pilots or prepare agents to carry out hijackings, the diplomats said.

The Council's debate was over the renewal of what is called the oil-for-food program, aimed at alleviating the hardship from years of tough economic penalties imposed by the Council. In May the Council settled on a list more than 400 pages long of goods excluded because they could be used for war.

The Council voted last week to postpone the renewal until Wednesday, but the United States is now proposing another extension.

Several Council diplomats said they were impatient with the proposal. The other 14 Council members were ready to approve a six-month renewal immediately.

The diplomats said they were concerned that the United States was drawing the aid program into its preparations for war against Iraq. The United States is demanding the items be added before it agrees to a regular six-month renewal.

Other Council members were expecting to continue the program and then confront the thorny issue of the list.

Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations, Mohammed A. Aldouri, said he was outraged about the proposed delay.

''We should not play games with the food of the Iraqi people,'' he said.

The Council must take a vote on Wednesday to extend the program one way or the other.
