

THREATS AND RESPONSES: THE U.N.; Annan Opposes a Quick Attack on Iraq
By Julia Preston
Jan. 1, 2003

Secretary General Kofi Annan said today that Iraq has cooperated up to now with United Nations weapons inspectors, so it would be ''premature'' to take military action before inspectors report back on their investigations to the Security Council on Jan. 27.

''I think the inspections are going on unimpeded, and everybody has agreed that the inspectors will come back and report to the Council on Jan. 27,'' Mr. Annan said in an interview from New York with Israeli Army radio in Jerusalem.

He said that the inspectors ''have to analyze what they have found and they will have to report to the Council, and in the meantime Iraq is cooperating and they are able to do their work in an unimpeded manner, and therefore I don't see an argument for military action now.''

A transcript of the interview was made available by Mr. Annan's spokesman here.

Mr. Annan's comments revealed a more optimistic evaluation of the inspections' progress and a different sense of timing from that of the Bush administration. American officials have stressed what they call gross omissions in a weapons declaration presented by Iraq, and they have sought to keep their options open for military moves by calling on the inspectors to give an interim report to the Council at least once before the deadline of Jan. 27.

Mr. Annan echoed the view of most members of the 15-nation Security Council, who are still hoping to avoid war in Iraq and want to let the inspectors carry out their work according to the schedule the inspections chiefs laid out.

The secretary general declined to say whether he believed that Iraq was hiding prohibited weapons.

The inspectors ''are supposed to find these things and they work very hard and come up with the evidence,'' Mr. Annan said. ''They have also told the Iraqis that they have to give them evidence to prove that they don't have these weapons. So until then -- the inspectors' report -- I think it would be premature to make any judgments.''
