

Threats and Responses: The Opposition; Iraqi Kurds Set Sights On Baghdad
By Dexter Filkins
Nov. 17, 2002

A senior leader of an Iraqi Kurdish group has said his forces intend to push all the way to Baghdad in the event of an American-led war in Iraq.

In an interview here on Friday, Jalal Talabani, the leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, said he had no intention of limiting his group's military activities to its base in northern Iraq. He predicted that any number of the armed groups who are fighting Saddam Hussein would converge on the capital if the Americans invaded.

''We are looking to Baghdad, we are focusing on Baghdad,'' Mr. Talabani said on a visit to Turkey. ''It is the capital. It is the main part of the country. We are not just looking through Kurdish glasses. We are looking through Iraqi glasses.''

The assertion seemed to raise the prospect of a division between the Kurds and American political leaders, who are fearful that an invasion could unleash a stream of bloodletting among the country's ethnic and religious groups. While American officials have indicated that they would like to employ Kurdish forces in the event of a war, they speak of limiting the Kurds' role to their base in northern Iraq.

American officials are working to ease concerns voiced by Turkish leaders, who have been battling a Kurdish insurgency within Turkey near Iraq. Turkish leaders have expressed fears that an American attack on Iraq could embolden the Kurds on both sides of the border to form their own state.

In the interview, Mr. Talabani reiterated his often-stated claim that Iraq's Kurds would not seek independence but rather want autonomy.

Other groups that would converge on Baghdad, he said, include rebels from the majority Shiite population, as well as the minority Turkoman and Sunni Muslims. Mr. Talabani said such interventions would go a long way toward keeping the peace. If these groups can capture the main cities, he said, ''this will be a good step forward to prevent civil war, to prevent chaos, to prevent clashes among various Iraqi groups.''
