

THE MARKETS: COMMODITIES; Crude Oil Rises on Indications Of Longer Cutoff of Iraqi Exports
By Bloomberg News
March 27, 2003

The price of crude oil rallied yesterday as Iraqi military resistance slowed a United States advance toward Baghdad, raising concern that war may keep Iraq's oil off the world market longer than the few weeks that had been expected.

Iraqi exports have been suspended as American-led forces seek to dislodge President Saddam Hussein's leadership. Prices have declined in most recent sessions on early expectations of a quick resolution of the conflict.

Elsewhere, fighting between troops and local forces led Royal Dutch/Shell and other companies to reduce output in Nigeria, Africa's largest producer, by more than one-third. Last month, Iraq and Nigeria provided about 6 percent of the world's oil.

''The war will not be over this week,'' remarked Kyle Cooper, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney in Houston, who added, ''You have a couple things here that could dramatically change the fundamentals of oil in a short time, and this makes everyone skittish.''

In trading yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil for May delivery rose 66 cents, to settle at $28.63 a barrel. In the last month, prices have tumbled from a 12-year end-of-session high of $37.70 on Feb. 26. Oil is up some 13 percent from a year ago.

A weekly report yesterday from the Energy Department showed a rise of 3.7 million barrels in crude oil inventories last week, to 273.9 million barrels. Analysts had expected an increase of 1.5 million to 2.1 million barrels. Supplies were down 14 percent from a year earlier.

The American Petroleum Institute, an industry group that issues a supply report at the same time, said crude oil stocks fell by about 400,000 barrels, supplies of distillates rose 1.78 million barrels and gasoline stocks fell by about 2 million barrels.

''We still have a long way to go before supplies are at a comfortable level,'' said Phil Flynn, a senior energy trader at Alaron Trading in Chicago.

Gasoline inventories, which declined for the sixth consecutive week, usually increase around this time of year as refineries prepare for warm-weather driving and increased demand.
