

The World; Iraq's Future: New Polity or Pandora's Box?
By Tom Zeller
Sept. 29, 2002

THERE are, without question, scores to be settled in Iraq. The Kurds have not forgotten the chemical attack that Saddam Hussein visited upon them 14 years ago -- an indiscriminate assault that killed thousands and left thousands more maimed and ailing. The Shiite majority -- nearly 65 percent of the population -- has long resented its historical persecution and exclusion from the highest ranks of power by the Sunni minority. And the wide chasm between those of means and those who are poor adds the burden of class-envy to a society that could be facing a power vacuum.

Throw in rich oil fields, stores of chemical and biological agents, and double-edged relationships with nearly all of its neighbors -- each of which is home to thousands of Iraqi refugees -- and the possibility of post-Saddam disorder, at least in the short term, seems quite real.

Any American incursion into the country will require not just military muscle, but a willingness to remain and see it through, according to Judith Yaphe, a senior research fellow at National Defense University in Washington. ''We have to make this commitment,'' she said. ''Everyone will be watching to see what we do. Neighbors like Iran will call it an occupation, of course, but they will also say 'You did this, and it is your responsibility to stay and ensure the security and territorial integrity of the region.'''

But even with an American or multinational presence, the removal of Mr. Hussein's iron grip on Iraqi society will almost certainly unleash old grievances and passions that, depending on how deftly a new political order is established, will either provide seeds for democracy or tinder for revolt.

''The temptation to settle accounts would be great,'' writes the Middle East scholar, Amatzia Baram, in an essay published on Friday by the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. What follows is an overview of some of the principal sites where such accounting might unfold. TOM ZELLER
