

A NATION AT WAR: INTERNATIONAL LAW; Iraq Violates Rules of War, U.S. Complains
By Diana Jean Schemo
March 24, 2003

Reports of Iraq's tactics on the battlefield and its treatment of captured Americans were seen by United States officials as evidence of serious violations of international conventions on the conduct of war, and brought warnings that Iraqi officials were courting prosecution for war crimes.

The Americans captured outside the southern Iraqi city of Nasiriya appeared on Al Jazeera television, which showed two rooms with four uniformed servicemen in each of them, lying dead in pools of blood. Two reportedly had bullet wounds to the head and a third appeared to have been shot in the groin. The report also showed Iraqi officials questioning five more captured Americans, asking one of them whether Iraqis had greeted him with guns or roses.

Coalition officials also reported that Iraqi forces had fought out of uniform, had flown false flags of surrender and then attacked, and had massed civilians to shield themselves from attack, all considered violations of the codes of war.

''What that means is there are going to be war crimes trials,'' said Eugene Fidell, president of the National Institute of Military Justice, an independent organization whose members are military lawyers and scholars on military law. He described the day's events as ''a very bad omen,'' foreshadowing little respect on the part of Iraq for the rules of war as the conflict advances.

The Geneva Convention, which Iraq signed in 1956, protects prisoners of war against ''violence and acts of intimidation and against insults and public curiosity.'' It also bars reprisals against prisoners of war.

Some experts in international law said the United States had also skirted the law by permitting American news organizations to show pictures of Iraqi soldiers surrendering, or being blindfolded and handcuffed by American forces. ''There's been a little violation on each side,'' said Detlev F. Vagts, a specialist on the laws of war at Harvard University Law School.
