

March 23-29: INTERNATIONAL; THE MARCH TO BAGHDAD
By Richard W. Stevenson
March 30, 2003

American and British troops advanced to within 50 miles of Baghdad and prepared to take on Saddam Hussein's elite Republican Guard. But the allied forces, spread out over hundreds of miles of desert, faced persistent fire from Iraqi troops and paramilitaries in southern Iraq, and also a blinding sandstorm that slowed ground and air operations. With supply lines stretched and commanders expressing surprise at the dogged resistance, American forces debated how and when to fight their way into the capital.

Having failed to win approval from Turkey to launch a northern front from there, the United States dropped 1,000 paratroopers into a Kurdish-controlled area in the north of Iraq. Iraq's defense minister said on Thursday that allied forces could encircle Baghdad within 5 or 10 days, but vowed a street-by-street fight for the city.

By the end of the week, the oil fields in southern Iraq were secure and the harbor at Umm Qasr was cleared of mines, paving the way for delivery of humanitarian aid. But President Bush distanced himself from earlier suggestions by the administration that the war could be over in weeks, vowing to press on ''however long it takes to win.'' Richard W. Stevenson
A version of this article appears in print on March 30, 2003, Section 4, Page 2 of the National edition with the headline: March 23-29: INTERNATIONAL; THE MARCH TO BAGHDAD. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

Trending

Nicole Rifkin
It’s Bong Joon Ho’s Dystopia. We Just Live in It.
Oct. 30
Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the National Security Council, arriving Tuesday on Capitol Hill to testify in the impeachment inquiry.
Erin Schaff/The New York Times
White House Ukraine Expert Sought to Correct Transcript of Trump Call
Oct. 29
Readers say Attorney General William Barr is outstanding.
Tom Brenner/EPA, via Shutterstock
Gail Collins
Opinion: The Worst Trump Cabinet Member? You Picked a Real Winner
5h ago
Judi Dench as Old Deuteronomy, traditionally a male role, in a scene from the trailer.
Universal Pictures
The Truth Is, ‘Cats’ Is as Inscrutable as That Trailer
12h ago
