

The Nation; Reading the Polls on Iraq
By Tom Zeller
Feb. 23, 2003

No president will say that polls drive policy, but the Bush administration must take satisfaction in knowing, for instance, that roughly 66 percent of Americans think taking military action against Iraq isn't an altogether bad idea. That's according to a recent New York Times/CBS News poll. But the poll also found that most Americans favor giving the inspectors more time to root around before launching an attack. Throw in a question about loss of life and Americans become ambivalent.

But what the overall numbers don't reveal are the differences among specific groups. Americans over all, for instance, are evenly divided when presented with the prospect of Iraqi civilian casualties, although those who identified themselves as Republicans had fewer uncertainties. Those earning under $30,000 are less comfortable with the potential costs than wealthier respondents. And while a larger percentage of those with household members in the military think the situation in Iraq requires action, most of them also think the administration is too quick to get involved. A selection of poll questions follows, with some areas of interest highlighted. TOM ZELLER
A version of this article appears in print on Feb. 23, 2003, Section 4, Page 5 of the National edition with the headline: The Nation; Reading the Polls on Iraq. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

Trending

Nicole Rifkin
It’s Bong Joon Ho’s Dystopia. We Just Live in It.
Oct. 30
Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the National Security Council, arriving Tuesday on Capitol Hill to testify in the impeachment inquiry.
Erin Schaff/The New York Times
White House Ukraine Expert Sought to Correct Transcript of Trump Call
Oct. 29
Readers say Attorney General William Barr is outstanding.
Tom Brenner/EPA, via Shutterstock
Gail Collins
Opinion: The Worst Trump Cabinet Member? You Picked a Real Winner
5h ago
Judi Dench as Old Deuteronomy, traditionally a male role, in a scene from the trailer.
Universal Pictures
The Truth Is, ‘Cats’ Is as Inscrutable as That Trailer
12h ago
