

U.S. Seeks Expulsion of Iraqi From the U.N.
June 15, 2002

The United States charged today that an Iraqi diplomat at the United Nations had tried to recruit Americans as spies, and ordered him expelled, diplomats said.

An American official said a formal note was delivered to the Iraqi mission accusing the diplomat of ''activities incompatible with his diplomatic status'' and ordering him to leave by the end of the month. Diplomats identified the Iraqi as Abdul Rahman Saad, who is listed as a first secretary in charge of economic affairs at the Iraqi mission. American officials said he was the chief intelligence officer, and that he had tried to recruit American citizens.

The Iraqi mission sent a letter to the American mission in response, asking for more information. Iraq said that it regarded ''the conduct and activities of Mr. Abdul Rahman Saad to be within his official capacity.''

Officials said the diplomat apparently had 24 hours to reply and to challenge the action, but that the challenge had to be channeled through the United Nations.

We are continually improving the quality of our text archives. Please send feedback, error reports, and suggestions to archive_feedback@nytimes.com.
A version of this article appears in print on June 15, 2002, Section A, Page 7 of the National edition with the headline: U.S. Seeks Expulsion of Iraqi From the U.N.. Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe

Trending

Nicole Rifkin
It’s Bong Joon Ho’s Dystopia. We Just Live in It.
Oct. 30
Lt. Col. Alexander S. Vindman, the top Ukraine expert on the National Security Council, arriving Tuesday on Capitol Hill to testify in the impeachment inquiry.
Erin Schaff/The New York Times
White House Ukraine Expert Sought to Correct Transcript of Trump Call
Oct. 29
Readers say Attorney General William Barr is outstanding.
Tom Brenner/EPA, via Shutterstock
Gail Collins
Opinion: The Worst Trump Cabinet Member? You Picked a Real Winner
5h ago
Judi Dench as Old Deuteronomy, traditionally a male role, in a scene from the trailer.
Universal Pictures
The Truth Is, ‘Cats’ Is as Inscrutable as That Trailer
12h ago
